
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by tushy. Tushy is a Sleek bidet attachment that Clips onto your existing toilet and sprays your butt completely clean with fresh water. It's amazing wiping your butt with toilet paper dry toilet paper does not remove all the shit. If you got poop on any other part of your body, would you just wipe it off with dry paper? / of course, you wouldn't if you got poop on your face, what would you do you clean your face thoroughly with water right? Well to she sprays directly onto your ass and removes all the poop completely. So you aren't sitting on bacteria that can lead to nasty things like hemorrhoids and yeast infections UTIs and itchy ass holes and skid marks. I'm a big fan of these. They're awesome and it sprays your ass with fresh water. It's not toilet water till she


connects to the water supply. Your toilet to spray your dirty Parts with clean fresh water and it's incredibly affordable. It starts just 79 bucks. First of all, don't use wet wipes. You don't want wet wipes wet wipes are worse than toilet paper. They're terrible for the environment and they cause anal fissures. You don't want that. What you want is to she it's a phenomenal way to clean your buddy saves you money on toilet paper. If you choose a little toilet paper to Pat it dry the end like this tap tap the amount. Is negligible go to Hello to she.com Rogan to get 10% off your order and free shipping. That's hello to she.com Rogan 10% off and free shipping and your asshole. Will thank you. Thank you also to the motherfucking cash app. That's right the cash app the number one app in finance in the known universe and the very best way to send money between your friends and your family without having to hold on to that. Dirty paper cash the cash have is also the very best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry as stacking SATs sat is short for Satoshi. Who's the legendary person that created bitcoin Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no. No Authority, I think that's the future of the world no Central authorities what we want with everything. Well, let's start with currency and of course when you download the cash app and you enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word, you will receive $10 and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Brands fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo. It's a win-win for everybody, so don't forget Use the promo code Joe Rogan all one word. When you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. We're also brought to you by policy genius home and auto insurance are very important things to have but they're also things that a lot of people put off because it seems like a gigantic pain in the ass. You just don't want to deal with it. Well protecting the things you've worked hard for is very important. The trick is knowing where to find the right coverage at the best possible price and That is why policy genius makes it easy. They combine a cutting-edge insurance marketplace with help from license experts


to save you time and money and policy genius saves their home and auto insurance customers and average of $1,000 per year by re shopping their rates. And here's how it works first. You had the policy genius.com and you answer a few quick questions about yourself and your property then policy genius does all the rest they'll compare. Air Raids from over 30 top insurers from Progressive to Nationwide to find the lowest quotes and then their license experts will look at all the ways to maximize your savings including bundling your home and auto policies and if policy genius finds a better rate than what you're currently paying they'll get you switched for free that kind of service has earned policy genius a five star rating across over 1,600 reviews on trustpilot and Google. So if you're a homeowner had to polish He genius.com right now to get started. They've saved their home and auto insurance customers an average of $1,000 per


year by re shopping policy genius when it comes to insurance. It's nice to get it. Right and we're also brought to you by expressvpn expressvpn keeps anybody from finding out what you're sneaking around and looking at online incognito mode is what a lot of people think, you know, I'll just use incognito mode and that'll save me no, no clearing your history. No. No, that doesn't keep your private. Your internet provider can still see all the sites you visit and they're legally allowed to sell that data to add companies your internet connection through expressvpn gets rerouted through secure servers. So that internet providers like Comcast or Verizon. They can't see your history. They don't have any fucking idea what you're looking at. It's available on all devices. On a computer tablet or smartphone you just tap one button to connect. It's super simple. It's


the fastest most trusted VPN on the market rated number one by CNET wired The Verge and countless more go to expressvpn.com Rogan and you can get an extra three months for free on a one-year package. That's expr ESS. VPN.com Rogan expressvpn.com Cam Rogan go there to learn more. My guest today is an author. He is a conservationist. He's a brilliant human being is one of my favorite people to talk to he's the host of the meat-eater podcast and the mediator Show on Netflix.


I love him to death. Please give it up for the Great and Powerful Steve. Rinella. The Joe Rogan Experience trade my day Joe Rogan podcast by night Can you just tell me about your friend who has a dick collection. I wish you is my friend still it was When I was younger, I don't know how I came into his orbit, but there was a fur buyer. And taxidermist and muskrat trapper in Muskegon County where I grew up in Michigan and he had amassed and very impressive collection of baculum, 's And you brought this up because Frank von Hippel had given us this fossilized walrus, ancient walrus dick bone.


Pecker bone swizzle stick. Yeah a friend of mine clay knew come here. He he uses them for very like the he saves the black bear ones and people use them as drink stirs and stuff. The first deer I ever killed, you gave me one and I was using it as a coffee stirrer for a while. Oh, he's like a gnat now. It's not like an actual bone bone in there. This Isn't their bone-bone in there? Know Well you gave me one. Might not have given me one from that. You gave me one from something else [crosstalk]. Maybe a rat maybe a raccoon or a bear or something have to look at it. I don't know but you gave me a dick bone and I had it in my backpack for a long time. Oh, huh?


Yeah. So, yeah, How often do you give away dick bones? You don't even remember that. 2Why would I wish I had I wish I had more to share this guy this Bob Harris got Lisa. Laughs you look like Bob Harris. Look exactly Bob Dylan. And he's gotta be around still remember being over his house one day and him advising someone over the phone within earshot of me. I remember this guy was going out to set muskrat traps and I remember Bob Paris advising him if anybody fucks with you shoot him and I was young enough that I didn't like get that. That was the humor thing, you know, the whatever just like a thing you'd say to your body to have a laugh and I remember being like man. These guys are serious about my scraps.


So I hope I don't run into that dude in the marsh and now my I could totally see saying that to somebody and then we'd have a laugh got off the phone how many animals have that bone man? I you know, I wish I knew and I don't even know what yeah, that's not Universal. No. No, it'd be interesting look up I never until right now. I never gave it any thought to like what classification of things has like what classification of things has like a an actual back alone actual pecker bone, you know all those at all. The weasels have it. I think chimps have it. We don't ya weasels do here goes.


It's absent human ungulates elephants. What does that mono trims? No, no Travis. What does that word mono Trio the Platypus and the Echidna marsupials lagomorphs hyenas by Notre ongs cyrenians and cetaceans among others evidence suggests that the baculum was independently evolved nine times and lost in ten separate lineages. I just keeps coming up man. Yeah just it just keeps coming up. Up the need to have one of those the need ya a built-in hard on.


That's a really nice one. I like that one. There are some that are big enough. I don't know what they're off. There's some that are big enough to be used as a cane. Really? Yeah, what animal is that bottles? Like certain walrus ones people used to use them as Kane. Well, that's not small that one right there and it's interesting because because of the fact that it's fossilized so heavy you carrying that between your legs. I wish I had a I feel like I want to challenge you on I feel like I want to challenge you on that being fossilized. Well, he said it was fossilized. You don't think it is anything but by the appearance because it's so light but doesn't it feel hell? Yeah, I don't want to I don't want to get in over my waiters here, but I I want it I want to challenge that but I don't but I would need to scrape into it with a pocket knife in the right to do that to your baculum.


That's okay. You could do that here. But see even that I don't do it because well, who am I to tell him you might scrape into it and I don't but they curve that but God damn dude, this is so he'll know there are there are that I don't know they might but there are some that have a hook in them. It keeps you keeps your mate from getting away Jamie. That'd be a hell of a pep stick you walking around on those little pension at one of those little tips. Did you hear that the thing with Trump? He called Lil pump. There's a rapper named Lil pump and he called them little pimp. No. I didn't yeah. Yeah, I did it the other day at a rally. Everybody was upset Tim's new character. I was going for ya because he has got to be fossilized man.


How else could it be that heavy? What kind of bone be that? Heavy Steve? That's so heavy here. Come on, man. You want me to put a little you didn't you know what? I'm give a little scraper down here on the end. It's great. But tell me what's up. Got that buzz. It is fossilized. Wow. Now I want to say that just like we were talking minute ago about how batters are betting like, it's trumpet vine. Yeah. I'm like back to it's fossilized flip-flopper my convictions at my convictions are weakly held but now poking it with your knife makes me think that it's a um, poking it with your knife, but this is way outside.


My area of expertise spoken with you knife makes me a Believer. I think Von hippel is a biologist, right? He's a man. You got a really good fact Checker over here and he's like have it's like haven't dog turn around. Yeah, it is very similar. Yeah. Dogs are very good fact Checker. It's all he does. He doesn't he doesn't heal me like when you're talking to him. He just looks at his phone. Because he's like no matter what you say is like nah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah biology ecology. Yeah, so they another one that's a physicist when it comes to the reason I have become interested in things me and fossilized is you know, if you're out on National Forest land not notice.


I'm not saying national parks. But if you're out on National Forest land or BLM land various land designations. You know, if you find like an antler deer antler you keep it right or if you find a chunk of bone. You can keep it but not a not an arrowhead, right? No. No because that's an artifact. What do you suppose but that's weird these supposed to leave it there dude. Does anybody that's an interesting I'd like to talk about because no not they do I remember so let me let me finish my thing about okay fossilized real quick exit. The reason I start to think about it is if but you're allowed to pick up a bone. Okay, if you're just out on depends on the land designation, let's say around a national force and you find a piece of bone.


You can keep it if it's fossilized. You can't keep okay, so you could find a like I found a few Buffalo skulls that are old but still bone. So here you have this thing that could be like 300 years old eroding out of a riverbed and if it's


not fossilized you can have it and keep it. Um, if it's just bone the thing is if that thing has cultural markings on it, then it becomes an artifact. So say you found a friend of mine. I don't know where they might have got it off. I don't know where they got there. They had had like the grandfather found it. They had a buffalo skull that had been axed open and it was so clearly hit open with a tool to get the brain out which would make it an artifact and then you can't touch it or if it's fossilized. You can't touch it. Private land is totally different. But um, yeah, it would be that so now when I like look at stuff am I was picking it up on my is like wishing. I had a better sense because I don't want to grab I don't want to like find something to bring home and then be in violation because I brought home a fossilized thing. Are you under any obligation to report it like say if you found a skull that had obviously been opened up by like ancient Native Americans. Are you under any obligation? If you can't take it to like Point archaeologists like, you know, drop a pin point. The spot where you found it, I don't I can't imagine. No I want it. I'm virtually certain you're not under any obligation. I did one time find a bison skull on National Forest land and did a site report or I cooperated with the forests the administrative unit of that National Forest because I had gone and did some work on it had a radiocarbon date. So I was able to supply them with a piece of information they didn't have and so we cooperated and did a site report and I had also kind of like called a little bit to make sure I wasn't in the wrong and this is in your book. That is that yeah. Yeah that I wrote like which is really good. Listen the audio version so nice to hear your voice the you you got a


chance to do it because I know the first version of it they hired some actors do it. Yeah. It was it was kind of funny thing about the book businesses. You Know audio as you know because you kind of like in some ways helped be at the Vanguard of pioneering this but audio is more and more important as more and more valuable now when I sold that my first couple books a publisher would you know buy your book and it would buy they buy just kind of like all right to it right And they would then go sell the audio off for sometimes next to nothing and someone would buy the audio rights for certain specified amount of time. So my first couple books my publisher buys my book.


No, my publisher basically turns around publisher. Then in this case Random House turned around and sold the audio rights to I think Brilliance audio whatever it is and they got it for 10 years. And at first I thought that they didn't invite me to read it because I I think I was like hop to it. Right but as wasn't invited to read my own book, they hired a soap opera actor of some sort to read it. I now think it's just an efficiency thing. Like they have sort of a stable. This company is based in Michigan my home state just totally coincidentally but have a new base. They're having a stable of talent that comes in and they're clean. They do clean work. They do fast work.


And they produce an audiobook like working with an author. It might take four or five days to record an audio book, but they just get a guy that comes in nails and hammers it whatever I get the I get the product and I turn it on and he starts talking and I couldn't get across the room fast enough to turn it off. It was the most it was like it was like watching it was like watching my wife have sex with another man. Whoa is like to see to hear about That is not what that book sounds like, you know, right and oh my God was a defensive and then 10 years goes by I wrote that book a decade ago 10 years goes by and we get the rights back.


So then not random house hasn't back and I got to go in and record my own thing and I got to update some of the science and stuff. You know, it was it was kinda like one of those little it was one of those career like a little career highlight for me like like something looking from the outside in wouldn't see wouldn't like see it as anything. But to me it was like is richly symbolic that that I had whatever got to like be in a position to be like Want to do it I go in record my book. It's how it wants to be and that something could still kind of have life after a decade. Yeah, my friend God sod who is a he's a professor out of Montreal.


He wrote a book He's a evolutionary biologist and he wrote a book on it called the parasitic mind about just very big be bizarre behaviors and the way people are weird thought viruses that people are falling into today woke culture and all that kind of shit and we - can you give me another example another example of a thought virus? Well, it's on fire is probably not even I mean he's used that term before but it's basically woke thinking like what what's problematic about it now? It's not not very objective and not rational and people are expected to think and behave a certain way because The Gatekeepers of social media and all these people are the ones that are It's on folks.


Anyway, he's got a very popular podcast and yet they still hired somebody else to read his book and I was like, this is so crazy. Like you have a such a distinct voice like why would you yeah, what what the fuck are they doing? Like, why would they do that? I think that it leads to at least do a lot of listener disappointment. Yes at the time I did this so I wasn't I was just a writer right? So there wasn't that and maybe we're moving away from that when you're working on something and I'm sure sure. Oh no, you'll know intimate Lee. Well what I'm talking about, well, I imagine your imagine your standup.


If you had to like turn in a word doc, I've had to do that before for someone else to do your stand-up I have to do that before. Oh, oh, oh not for someone else to do it, but for them to decide whether or not the things that I was saying, we're approvable. Oh my gosh, I went up been without without the without all the delivery. I mean like, all right. I don't want to I'm not trying to conflate that like writing a book and stand up because delivery is vastly more important and what you do, but you do get a sense of like the case. Somehow something goes. Yeah, and it feels important to you, but it's kind of like a goofy way to think about it because people that everyone that read it everyone that reads it is on their own trip. They don't know your Cadence but somehow it's just offensive to hear them.


Read it aloud. Yeah, well spell of this makes any sense. It's like secure. This is like particular to virtually. Nobody know. I think it makes a lot of sense. I mean particular not particularly now because your podcast become so popular and people are used to the way you talk of a very unique way. Of describing a discussing things and I could imagine how offensive it would be. If someone just sort of actor did it? Yeah, you know, yeah it is and that was So like that book I was at the height of my writing Powers because I hadn't had um, I was just a writer I wasn't married. I didn't have kids you were free.


I could I could spend a couple years just like focused on something, you know, and so I do like the fact that thing still that the fact that that book still works and people still read it like, I'm happy about that. You know color can be like yeah, man, like I feel like like that was a reasonable book interesting way. It's a very good book. I really enjoyed it. But it's an interesting way of talking about it that you were at the height of your writing Powers because you were free because you really could just concentrate on that and I think about that a lot with with anything, you know, like that's the case with stand-up comedians the case with Fighters for sure when Fighters have families and they start getting distracted by a bunch of other businesses and other things that they're doing.


It's almost always signifies a downslide and their skills. Yeah almost always for sure man. I'm watching right now. I'm Netflix. I'm watching The Last Dance the Jordan documentary and I'm not a basketball fan at all most the stuff new information to me, but in watching it and like that study of focus and discipline and I wonder like And looking at him I couldn't help but think let's say there was an undecided election, you know, like a contested undecided election and there's a global pandemic that guy. Would still go on that field or on the court sorry and probably be just as good as he always has and I think that a decade ago, whatever like at that point in life when you just like maybe more self-absorbed or something.


I could be sitting right now in this current climate, like obviously right now just like singularly focused on this thing instead of the school board is voting like whether or not kids are going back. Back to school full-time and like I need to pay attention to that because I have kids I need to pay attention like, you know, I feel obligated to pay attention politically and I have other mediums that I work in now and it's yeah, you just get like spread out doing stuff. I think maybe that doesn't happen to you know, it does. Yeah it does maybe tell me you have three jobs. Yeah, I do jump from one of the other they connect.


Well fortunately they help. Each other the thing about well, you know, I obviously haven't been doing much stand up during the pandemic. I only did one weekend it one weekend in Houston. I got real weird it out thinking like what if I caught covid then I gave it to somebody particular if I gave it to a guest but um stand-up comedy for sure helps podcasting podcasting for sure help stand-up comedy the minute you get more comfortable doing each one of them because the fact that stand-up comedy is alive and then podcasting is also live right your there's no That there's no script and you get more comfortable expressing yourself in stand-up comedy the fear of doing it in front of live audiences you get accustomed to people paying attention to you and watching you that makes UFC commentary easier because when the cameras are on the UFC, I never think oh shit all these people are watching now and never think that because people are always watching I don't care.


Yeah. It doesn't I can just express myself. So all they feed into each other. What are you because you get increasingly at least from my perspective increasingly you get scrutinized and over scrutinize in the media. Is it hard to tune it out. It's easier than ever brother. Yeah. It's interesting because it's so common. I could just shut it off yet. No, it's just it's one of the things that happens you get too big if you get too big it gets you popular look if there's 300 million people in this country and you have a one percent of them are critics you a million critics. You know when you're being you're being conservative that I forgot if you're if you're really lucky you only have a million critics you really you have three million critics three million critics is that's a crazy number.


That's a such a Nutty Nutty number if there's 300 million people and one percent of them don't like you have three million people that don't like you. Yeah, that's insane. Like if you really stopped and thought about that that'll fuck with your head. If you have you know people in the media if you have a hundred thousand, Professional journalists that are focused on Comedy. What are the numbers are not going to enjoy you it's going to be high. It's going to be a few thousand when I'm reading about you and what you think and how you are and I'm sitting there thinking like always not it makes me it makes me question. Like it makes me question everything. I read I was saying to someone the other day that there's there's one thing Americans like there's like two stories Americans like in this order they like a story about what an ass.


All a celebrity is and the second thing they like most but not as much as that thing is how great a celebrity is but they would say they like the first one better. Yes way, but well, it's more sellable. Right? I mean that's why this Ellen is mean things gotten so much traction, you know Ellen's mean to her guests and she's me for like who tell me more exactly exciting way you find how much and you when you find that Ellen has like a half a billion dollars you like. Oh my My God tell me more about how mean she is. Like I want I need to know the dirt. That's it's just a common thing with people someone becomes successful.


You're gonna you're gonna get scrutinized and it's also like different perspectives. Like for some people the way I think in the way I talk is offensive to them. They don't you know, they have a very clear-cut idea of the way people should think and behave, you know, it's particularly on the left which is, you know, it's become more and more weird because It would be much easier for people on the left to label me if I wasn't left wing. That's what's confusing because like I do support basically every left wing position other than Second Amendment and increasingly the way they attack the first amendment's weird. Mmm, like they seem to think that it's censorship is okay as long as you're sensing someone who disagrees with the ya think which is a new thing in the left at the acceptance of the first amendment.


I mean like I brought this up before but the ace You the ACLU was founded by people that were literally supporting Nazis like supporting actual Neo-Nazi groups and and saying it like the law and litigation. I prefer Free Speech issues. Yeah. This is important like like even though their views are abhorrent you have to support these that you have to support their ability to express themselves. Like this is what the foundation of this country is about like free expression is the only way you find out what's right and what's wrong shutting people down stopping people from communicating is a silly Short-sighted approach to debating an issue and this is more and more common than ever on the left like because because of deep platforming because you have the ability with social media because social media is not really protected by the First Amendment social media, you know, like whether it's Twitter or YouTube or whatever their private companies and they can decide.


Hey, we don't


want this guy on because his views don't align with ours and they have silence people and and kick people off their platforms. The really aren't doing anything wrong. They just do they're saying things that the people that owned and run the social media companies don't agree with. Yeah, that's that to me is the weirdest aspect of the left today. But other than that, like gay rights women's rights civil rights women's right to choose. I'm with all that I am with all of them. I'm with universal basic income. I'm with I'm with Medicare for all yeah, I can argue about that. But this is why I'm this is why I think that it's not a bad idea. Have a certain amount of money where you you give it to people in times like this covid pandemic, when you look at this pandemic if people had a certain amount of money that came to them every month and they didn't have to worry about food and they didn't have to worry about housing. Like they were taken care of you could see how it would be easier to get back on track like the way people are today. We're more than 30 plus percent can't pay their rent. There are on the verge of eviction and all the protections against eviction are about to run out. Out yeah like that. This is this is a great example of where you do need big government. This this pandemic is the best example ever or at least some sort of organized charitable, you know, some sort of charitable organization where they really know how to take care of people that run into hard times especially hard times like this where it's through no fault of your own the real argument against Universal basic income is the same argument against a lot of A lot of people we use against welfare that like you you remove incentive. You give people free money and you remove their incentive you remove their motivation and the


develop a whole class of people that relies on this and they've become accustomed to it. It's actually terrible for them. It's terrible for everybody else. Ya got argument to that's what when I look at that issue, that's one of the things I think about is, you know, I don't even want to pretend that I don't view things do my own lens, but when I look at myself at pivotal points in my life Been trying to get going the fact that I was. intensely motivated by just trying to find a way to pay my rent and my cell phone bill.


but intensely motivated by that and I do Wonder like if you had alleviated me from that the the what path a might have gone down and I don't think of myself as being like a weird or that different so I wonder but in terms of when you're talking about The censorship and what culture is there's a guy I work with Byron and he was kind of I feel like I'm sort of capturing his sentiment you just pondering how if you think about the in the 60s, right that is like the right, you know the right they were the squares, you know, they were the ones like tisk like the disapproving.


You know, what are they doing now? And he was kind of he was noticing that The how the left has sort of taken over this like are of disapproval. Hmm like yeah my goodness. How could that young man? Say that, you know, that's a yeah, he someone should tell that yeah man to stop that. You know, what happened social media. That's what happened people got the ability to complain where other people are going to listen or this is there's just there's so much signal out there. There's so much noise. So many people have the opportunity to complain about things and they're also formulating their complaints in a way.


They hope will resonate with people that really have no dog in the fight. Hmm. So they just want a say something that people go Hawkeyes got a good point click. I'll give him a little heartbeat for that. You know, you don't want to ask you about man. I know that you said this for as long as I've known you. You don't like you don't you don't pay attention to social media comments on a recent episode of years. I heard you put it that you post something and run away. Yeah, but do you ever like late at night like sneak a peek? Like do you break you so you really don't break your rule never at night. Imagine if you see something night and fuck that guy and then it rolls around your head this terrible know at night.


I don't if I watch anything on my phone at night. It's Innocuous like I like watching pool. I like watching pool games. Gotcha. I like watching like maybe a science video or something like that something very uncontroversial and innocuous. I don't allow myself to get into Conflict at night. Yeah. I think that's very bad for your sleep bad for your head. If something bothers you, you know, even something that is even if I agree with them like even if someone says something like, oh he was kind of a, you know ignorant when he said that or this is a stupid thing. This is a bad. If I'm even if I agree with the person saying that I don't want us to I want to read that at night. I brought my don't mind reading in the morning and then thing.


Yeah. Good point. Yeah. Yeah, I could have handled that better or yeah, maybe I should have looked at it this way. Yeah, I'm not without fault but I don't think it's good to read that shit at night, but reading that shit at any time we come on Boris fucking critic. I hate everything I do so if if if someone is like just agreeing with the perspectives that already have about things that I should have said differently or The other thing is like most of the things I'm criticized on. It's like thinking on the fly like this like doing this like I don't have any idea what I'm about to say, right like you don't either we're just talking so words pop in your head ideas pop. When you try to express them. It doesn't always work out and sometimes you tired sometimes you're hungover.


Sometimes you're not feeling so good. So I'm like your brain doesn't always fire at the exact same way. Like my car is remarkably consistent, right you get in your car as long as it's tuned up. It's you hit the gas. It responds in a way. That's Very consistent. Yeah, that's a good point man. My brains not that consistent my brain sometimes like a six cylinder and sometimes it's like a fucking Supercharged V8 varies a lot, you know, and it did and also sometimes subjects come up that I didn't anticipate like occasionally. I'll talk about something where I'm deeply studied on it and and like some it'll come up and I'll go oh no. No. No, this is why that is and I get very excited and I have a very clear idea.


Of everything that's nuanced about that particular subject, but sometimes things come up and I'm like, oh, yeah, and I'm in the process of talking. I'm kind of working it out in my own head and I'm not exactly sure how I think about it. I have to kind of formulate opinions on the fly or formulate a descriptive on the fly or try to tell a story that maybe I haven't really worked out in my head. I'm trying to tell it it while I'm thinking about it. I'm also talking doesn't always work out that good. Yeah. The thing I think about this very similar to this that never mind. I'll tell you an example of a thing that someone said to me this struck me is really funny and I wanted to go and tell people what they said, but then I'm like shit.


I don't know if I can tell people that they said that that's a weird one. Yeah you are you enjoying doing podcast is it man? Yeah. It has it's my So of all of the things I do okay of the the various things I do for a living it's the thing. I enjoy most. Actually doing it. Right, like having a guest on for instance. There's a guest we have I bring a mug shots taken of him or this guy Jim Jim heffel finger from Arizona.


I bring him up because we're talking about criticism. I'll always read criticism that he sends if he listens to something or right. He's like that's just not right. It's not coming from a meeting place is coming from a place where he's trying to be additive to conversation. He'll send me some things to be like, hey, man, you might Um, this is a thing you should think about and maybe want to clarify like I'll open my email every single time and he gives me a lot of them. Yeah, that's different. That's a it's a beautiful relationship, you know, and it's like but all criticism criticism doesn't go that way because people like to people want to see people bleed right? Here's this guy. I like doesn't want to see people bleed. He just wants to advance the conversation but having you know to help with the time I had him on have him we're having a conversation about biology wildlife management, and I'm just like whole time I'm like Thrilled by what I'm hearing.


Yeah, like thrilled by the presentation thrilled by what I'm hearing is great information is delivered. Well that if you had a joy meter in your head, like of all the things that like you actually do that to me is is that interaction to me is great. Yeah because you're getting the moment you're living or as writing. Yeah, it's almost right sailor. Like like I don't I kind of hate the actual Act of doing it not enjoyable like actually doing it is not enjoyable everything that comes out of it. I love doing it is not enjoyable such a common thing to say mean so many riders find I mean hunter has Thompson, you know famously hated writing.


Yeah torturous thing to do then like don't remember the writer Ian Frazer saying to me that when he was young and want to be a writer. He imagined himself sitting at his typewriter chuckling to himself. Which is like isn't the reality even like when I get a you know, we're working on an episode Show episode and I get a rough cut. I don't get a when I open it. I opened it with a sense of dread. Hmm not with like oh boy, it's here is that I got this not how I feel now open them like that. That's how I feel when I edit my stand-up specials, even if I know they were killer if I know I killed. I know I was there Standing Ovation every cheered everybody laughed fuck sit down my Jesus and I have to go over it, you know and try to find what's the best camera angle and how do you know?


Yeah, but I do I do. Like it a great deal. It's funny that that you're running this it changes conversation a little bit when you're talking to someone like if I have someone really good on I'll sometimes or someone that that is laying a lot of stuff on me that I wish I retained. I'll have to go back and re-listen to it because it's kind of amazing. I've always prided myself on being really good at remembering what people said like if I'm fighting my wife and later. We're About the fight. She's like where you said I said no. No, it's not what I said. I said quote and you said quote and I'll go to the Grave with that right?


Like I'm very good at remembering people said and I'm shocked and I really listened to a guess that I'm really excited to have on and they're like, it's an information heavy episode. I'm shocked at all the stuff I missed. Let me see one or like just the fact that there's a microphone and headphones like somehow I lose my ability to be a person who just like locks info up. Well, it's also because you're in Process of not just listening to what they're saying, but you're steering the conversation you trying to figure out how to respond when to step in when to not step in you have questions. You don't know when to ask them. Should I hold up what I let this guy continue this thought I have to stop here because there's something weird but I don't want to make this uncomfortable and I want to miss anything out. So there's all this shit going on with that.


You're sort of managing the conversation but it's not as simple as you just sitting there talking to somebody you're talking to someone and you know that other people are going to listen and yeah, It doesn't seem like it's an art form, but it's definitely an art form you get better at it. And you also develop a way of expressing yourself that's entertaining for people to hear. It's not just that you're talking you're talking in a way where it smoothly and comfortably enters other people's brains. Yes, one of the ways I've noticed that and I even had that problem. Excuse me. I don't have that problem. When we were having our little Preamble chitchat here the presence of a microphone.


Changes my thought pattern. Oh, yeah, for sure for sure. You get you do get used to it though. Like I feel like hundred episodes. I feel way less inclined to say something really indefensible. Yeah. What's that supposed to get? Well, that's the problem with the early days of my podcast is that we didn't have any thought that people were actually listening. Like when I did the earliest versions of the podcast like, you know, ten years ago nine years ago. We were just get barbecued and we would just talk shit as if no one was in the room. You know, what? Talked like if I sat down with Joey Diaz or Ari shaffir or one of my comedian friends, we would just say the most ridiculous Preposterous shit because that's how we talk to each other when there's no one around because that's the things that we find funny like when you're talking to a comedian like regular things aren't as funny.


It's like we've seen it's like if you're if you're going to show a boo-boo to a guy who's an ER doctor, you got a cut on your finger like that's not impressive. I just saw a guy get shot in the head. Yeah, like he needs he needs more. They need more I want to see an amputation was show me you want to freak me out, you know, show me something that's regular real injury and that's how comedians are. It's like there's an unfortunate aspect of those conversations if you take those conversations and you edit them out of context and then show it to people. Oh my God, these guys are horrible human beings like know the we're Comedians and yeah, you'd have to shit you'd have to preface if you went around saying Wouldn't it be funny if someone thought right but even then they were kind of that part out so saying but that's like what a conversations like when you just goofing on stuff your friends, but you just leave out the part where you say like wouldn't it be funny if someone thought yeah, you just say it as though it's coming from you but everyone it's understood that you mean like wouldn't it be funny of right?


Yes, exactly. Yeah. It's so it's a weird medium podcasts are because it's never really existed before right. This is a new New thing like my friend Adam Curry is the original podcaster. He's the Pod father. He was the first guy to ever have a podcast and he was an MTV DJ host. He actually lives here in Austin. Oh remember Adam, I never put it together. Those the same person. That's Adam Curry. Yeah, beautiful handsome man. Had those flowing like, oh, yeah. No, I've known this but I never like yeah, he runs the never put it together is like worse than No Agenda pocket. He's actually one of the reasons I moved to Austin he was saying Austin's praises. And I had been here many many these kind of were like that.


Michael Jackson leather jacket. Yeah. Yeah. Well, he pulled over flat handsome bastard. Look at that. Yeah. Oh look at that here. That's the same dude got assisting dude now show picture of him today right there bam. That's him today. Yeah, damn. Yeah, he's the original. He's an OG so he oh, yeah, but I never like you knows I can't think of a parallel here but not like I'm aware of these two. Yeah, right, but you hadn't put them together. Oh, that's the same guy. Oh, no. Yeah. Yeah, he's awesome. I love that guy. He's he's got a great podcast called No Agenda, it's his podcast and he he really had the very first one and I don't think that was any earlier than 2000 Jim who was at 2005 Maybe.


Somewhere around that so his pod Keys original podcast was four years before my first podcast, which is 2009. So 2007. Okay. So two years before mine. So you're talking about a guy a thing rather that's only been around for 13 years. Like there was never a thing where you could just put something out there sit down talk to people and there's no middle men, like people think like because I have this deal with Spotify that there's a bunch of people sitting on my shoulder you come in here. You see what it's like, there's no one here. Like it's a skeleton crew. There's actually a sensor standing right next to the gotten. It's exactly the same. It's such a skeleton crew and to have something like we did in the election show last night that 7 million people saw to have something that has a total skeleton crew doesn't make any sense that it could reach those kind of numbers.


So this this new form of communication it hasn't been figured out yet. Yeah, like no one no one exactly knows its potential. No one knows exactly what Influence all of it is there's a lot of mainstream media people that are really upset by it. It's also one of the reasons why I get so criticized people get so mad. They don't like the fact that I have this much influence. They don't like the fact that so many people are paying attention that it doesn't seem right. You know that this is a this is not from the New York Times is not from NBC. This is not from whatever its but all the sudden all these people watching it, but this is a new thing so people haven't figured this out yet, even though it's been around for 13 plus years. They're still But what the fuck is this like four years ago?


No one took podcast. Seriously. Yeah, four years ago Howard Stern had an episode where he's mocking podcast. It's a want you to yell out the window. No one's listening. It was like you're wasting your time you waste you and he was making fun of Adam Carolla overdoing it. Oh that right. Yeah making fun of people for doing it. And I think part of that was also he's a smart guy and he was also in the middle of his renegotiation with Sirius satellite radio, and he was probably mocking comparisons to what he does. With this huge organization Sirius XM is used like easy like the lap dog of FM and then came like the lap dog of satellite. Yeah. Yeah, but it's I don't remember what my original point was but no brand-new brand-new.


This is a fucking really new thing. Yeah. I mean, I've taught I think I tell you this every time I come on your show, but the first time I like ever heard the word podcast, I'm not joking. I had never heard the word until Helen Cho told me about going on Joe Rogan's podcast and I was like, well what I could I could go and show you where I was sitting when I heard it. I remember your seems like you just need to go. She's right house. It's a what what what that's that'll never work. Well that was a lot of people's attitude. It might even like people that I was really close with like there's a comedy store documentary that just came out as a five-part documentary on one of the episodes.


My friend Tom Segura was who was on like episode 2 or some shit like he's on early early but he's been on fucking hundred plus times. I have no idea how many times he's been on but he was there in the early days and he's in the the documentary was talking to Brian red band and he was saying like, what is he doing? Like why is he doing this red band was like, I don't know some people listening and he's like, can you go to the list and it's like 2,000 people like 2,000 people were watching this. That's it. You spent three hours doing this fucking stupid show for two thousand people for no money. Like why are you doing this? Yeah, but would you would you imagine yourself being a Visionary or do you imagine yourself being that that you know, it was lucky lucky.


Yeah. No vision. No, I've expected to be the way it was forever like someday, they'll make a they make a movie like The Social Network not the salsa dilemma, but they make a movie like The Social Network, which is about like Zuckerberg. And those guys like on Facebook they'll make like when they do the story of you, I wonder if they'll do it that right the you had a vision let me play they're going to last tree that's bent right now. I thought it was going to be the way it was back then forever. No one paid attention, very small amount of people but fun. It was a great way for it. Look I loved doing morning radio. I used to love doing it. I hated getting up.


Holy the Collins family. Or shows while not calling sold go there like when I if I say I was going to Phoenix like those things loved. It was fun. I'd get up in the morning smoke a joint go in there with my friends and we talk shit and if it was maybe like the zany guy and then you have is like his yeah female counterpart who put him in his place to go in there and do the necklace 7:00 in the morning. Yeah. Exactly. I used to love it. I used to love it because I would go in like with Ari or Joey or someone like that and we would go and have Fun and we'd say hey, we're going to be the Improv this weekend and then they would say so, you know what's been going on? What do you into and then you have a story about this and about that but that's fine.


That's fine. They leave there and have a good time with them, you know, like eight out of ten of them were good time to out of 10. We're like, this guy's gross like this. This show sucks this some people are clunky. They just they're not good at it. They just oh dude, like what when I used to have to do that for books it was I just thought that was the worst thing that could possibly happen to a person but when you're high and It's early in the morning and you went to bed like three hours ago and it'll eat it up. At least you dealing comedy to go and be like, well, you know, if you go back to the Lewis and Clark expedition, you'll find nothing was expected of me, right? I was just like this silly person who hosted Fear Factor or was on a sitcom and I would come in and I would be in town to tell jokes and like that was what it was.


So I always thought like particular when I did if I did like the Opie and Anthony show in New York. That was a really fun one because those guys were on by Started doing it was on the regular radio to but they were on XM and when they were on XM you can swear I was like, this is amazing. Oh it's where you can just go on and it was a hang like you'd have like four or five comedians in the room. We'd all just be shit on each other and laughing and I need to get out of there like God I felt so good. It was so fun. And you go get some breakfast take a nap and go do your shows would you? Uh, did you used to do Stern ever? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, but that was a different thing because stern was like at the helm he was never a hang, you know. It was the Howard Stern shows Howard Stern asking questions you responding to those questions.


And you know, it was very historic that shows like he was the he's the first guy he like if it wasn't for him there would be none of this. Like there was guys before, you know, there was like, I guess I miss was one of those guys. I was never an honest guy, but he was the guy who's nationally known as the man who's who had this outrageous radio show ya know so and that Sort of helped the Opie and Anthony show come to fruition. And then that I think the Opie and Anthony show was the in a lot of ways the Nexus it was it was a lot of ways. It was the idea that led to podcast but when I was doing it, there was no thought in my head like this is going to be just like the Opie and Anthony show or this is going to be just like Howard Stern to just you just you wait just to wait there was none of that.


I just keep showing up and then one day I was at the Chicago Theater I did this game. A of the Chicago Theater 3700 people right sold-out show and I go I had a story I was going to tell you how many how many people listen to podcast? Yeah. All right, and I went oh shit. I'm putting that into my movie man. And I remember thinking because my movies and be called The Joe Rogan Experience, but I remember very clearly being. Oh no, like like like almost a sense of dread like shit like this is the this is gotten A place where I didn't know where it was and it's already there. Yeah. This is that I've been just doing it. You know what I think by that time we were doing at the ice house with this little room off the comedy club at the ice house which show up there and do it there and it was just bizarre.


I was like what happened because you're just doing it like this right you have no, you know, you could say if you wanted to twist this amazing. I think I think you could say in your own defense has Maybe I'm Wrong here, but maybe you knew something. Maybe you knew more than you thought because you probably weren't doing 10 goofy things. How's that what you mean meaning? Like, let's say aye. Went out and started 20 business 20 goofy little businesses. Right? Right, and then at some point like holy shit, like one of them took off. Yeah. Yeah turns out my business of selling Old Ranch worn leather gloves to people who like, you know, wish they had that look took off and made a boatload of money and then later I'm like, yeah, you know, I always knew but people be like dude you realizing like you did all kinds of stupid everything nothing ever worked out for you then I'll send like This thing takes off and you want to know act like you like saw it comin.


So I think that probably in the, you know, probably the bat it's good that you don't act this way. But probably the back of your head. You probably recognize the you rot like maybe recognize around to something. Nope. Definitely not. Don't try I'll try to help you out. Don't help me out. I'm telling you. It's not the case. It's just dumb luck. I have a certain amount of brain damage. I don't know how much I have but definitely have a little and I think part get from from the pharmaceutical or not. Pharmaceuticals can punch. Got you. Sure, there's sir. This is certain amount is inevitable. Yeah from the time. I was 15 tells 21. I got hit a lot. This is must be some and because of I think there's a certain amount of not give a fuck that comes with that.


Yeah, like literally I think that was kicked into your head. This is I'm not joking Sam Kinison and Roseanne Barr the perfect examples of a use both of them were normal people and then they get hit by cars. Sam Kinison got hit by a truck and his brother who talks about it in his book called Brother Sam brother Bill wrote a book about it is like there was once an and then Sam got hit by a car and became a totally different person from head trauma and then became wild and impulsive and just became a maniac that was Sam Kinison that we all knew and loved same thing with Roseanne one of the things when I was defending Roseanne when she got in big trouble and she came on the podcast to talk about it. I wanted people to understand what I knew about Roseanne.


There's in was in a mental health Institute. She was in she was institutionalized for nine months after a car accident. She was hit by a car walking across the street when she was 15 years old. Hmm and just fucking wrecked like massive brain trauma, like really never the same again couldn't count. She was great at mathematics. She was a really an excellent student and then hit by a car and then just wild and impulsive and they locked her in a mental institution for nine months. She was crazy. She's like lick certifiably crazy medicated on a whole bunch of different things. And my take was like to make her responsible for things. She said when she's been rewarded her whole life for saying outrageous shit and she's on Xanax and she's smoking pot and she's drunk and you just you just want to label her as his awful horrible person when America's loved her for her whole life for being the same same way for being wild and impulsive but my point is that those two people were created that way from brain trauma.


Hmm. It made them Wilder there has to be there's no doubt. I Some brain damage no doubt and when people say like why aren't you worried about criticism or why don't you think there's some of that there there's got to be some of it where I I've had enough trauma just to the right amount just enough of these it doesn't bother me that much God. I'm gonna have you just full out. Want me on the head you think about the things just the right. Am I the things that things that hold people back one of the big things that hold people back is fear, right then were they worried. They're worried about the repercussions. They're worried about other people's reactions that worried about how you'll be viewed the worried about these things.


I don't have a lot of that for whatever reason. I mean, I don't want to hurt anybody's feelings. I'm a genuinely nice person. But if someone doesn't like being like fuck am I gonna do I'll keep moving. I think what what happened with me with podcast is that all these people were telling me you're wasting your time? All these people were telling me not to do it. Like what why are you wasting your time doing this and all thing is? Yeah, I like doing it just gonna keep doing it. Like I just didn't it didn't like agents want to had nothing to do agents to this day the that I have that could have gotten in on the podcast could have gotten a piece didn't want it. Do they double back around now?


Oh, yeah. They had a chance like I need help with ads like pads. Like wit. Fuck. Are you doing wasting your time with we're here doing real things we have time for this like they didn't want to have anything to do with it. This is just but I didn't I didn't have some fucking Grand Vision. I just know what I like to do and what I like to do something I go. Oh, I like to do that. I'm just going to keep doing that like this is same thing with martial arts the same thing with bowhunting like the amount of time that I spend practicing archery is fucking preposterous. Ridiculous for a person who is busy as I am. But that's what I like. I like doing that. So I do that, you know, like I take weeks off every year to go in the mountains and Hunt because it's dialect doing that.


I'm just gonna keep doing that. That's what I like doing. You know when you earlier we were reading up on back and Limbs and it was saying how back and arms had been invented multiple times multiple times, right and all these dead end lineages and you look at something. You know flight right someone could be excused for coming and seeing things that you know, dragonfly in a bird, right and imagining that there was a like an event that that spawned these things right? But in fact they arrived at this like same place they arrived at the same sort of place with like winged flight through completely unrelated channels, you know, it's got there like on their own what's funny about podcasting is As podcasting takes itself more seriously.


It's like you have this sort of convergent, you know, the term like divergent evolution and convergent evolution convergent evolution. There's a convergent evolution with like news and podcasting. It started out as a room maybe like a somewhat of a Revolt, you know, it was uncontrolled. It was irresponsible. It was Goofy. It was like a response to but as It's become becoming become formalized with scrutiny with ideas of responsibility with with ideas of like making a you know, usable practical respected product. There's kind of a convergent evolution of driving it back into the thing that maybe it was a response against in the first place exactly.


That's where the brain damage comes in because I go get the fuck out of here in the head. That's where I go. Get the fuck out of here. I'm not doing that what people say like, you can't have people like Alex Jones in the podcast. You can't get drunk on a podcast that 10 million people are going to watch. Yeah. You can't smoke pot all the time. You can't deal Mike. Yes. I can. I've done it the whole time like why am I stopping now? Well now it's a big business. Now you have this big deal. Now, you know your the writing articles about you the New York Times, like now you have to stop but that this was the way it got there in the first place the way he got there in the first place is people are tired of seeing these prepackaged like if you see like here's the best example evening news.


Good evening. Hi. I'm skip fuckface, you know, this is guys with his fake voice doing this like super overproduced thing where they're talking about subjects. The banter in between stories on fake news is our on news rather news broadcast is the most fake communication known to man like the woman will say something the goggle. Well, that's certainly a crew. You store in other words, we're gonna go to Bob outside and then they go to this and that and I got I find that's a it's a terrible thing terrible tragedy amazing terrible. If you can see really inspiring their did they have these like weird little fake interactions that that is the opposite of podcast podcast is real like if that was me and you played some video about some guy who decided he was going to try to do a backflip over a Lamborghini and landed on his head and I He's like I'll be like what how the fuck does that happen?


Like you have a baby like you have kids you have a baby like look at my little baby like and then your baby starts growing up and you like God. I'm so proud of them is it leaves a little drawing made and then it gets to the point where he's on YouTube doing back flips over Lamborghinis and landed on his head. Like what went wrong? Yeah, like that's how a normal human being would talk, but you don't have that when you have a massively overproduced program when you have all these people that have a vested interest in that being successful. So you have Executives you have producers you have writers. You have all these people that have a piece of the pie. So you instead of having a Jamie and a couple other folks that our security guys out there instead of that.


I have what a hundred people like a normal show that reaches the amount of people that this this show does there would be a staff of a hundred people and those people would all absolutely married have an enormous gate though system of Gatekeepers legal exactly know so and then the things you we're going to talk about would be heavily vetted you you would have people come in with pieces of paper and they would talk. Okay in the first segment, you're going to discuss the the weather Pennsylvania's vote is coming in and let's be real clear that you know, here's the here's the information you have to go over and there's none of that here. So whether or whether I'm good or bad whether I'm right or wrong at least, you know, it's just me.


This is a thing they were worried about when it goes to Spotify. Like people are worried. Oh my God, they're gonna have sensors in the room is going to be people telling them what to Do what people are worried about is it becoming overproduced to becoming something other than what it is because they know that's the natural course of progression. Somebody gets ahold of something that's wild and untamed and they go we got a harness that make a lot of money off of it. But the way to make a lot of money off of podcasting is the opposite way is to leave it while but how you going to leave it wild though. When all these people are paying attention to it and all these people are criticizing it, you know, as we talked about this like if a million people know about your show or a hundred Million people know about your show and just one percent of them are mad at you one percent of a hundred billion is a million fucking people are mad at you.


Even if 99% think you're awesome. Yeah that 1 million could make a big dent in your head can pay attention to it. I think a way that they might invite you to look at it. I'm not suggesting you do this, but I think where they might invite look at it could be Captured by this article. I read many many years ago called the radioactive Boy Scout. It was about a kid who is working on some project where he needed to find some, you know, americium or something for some Boy Scout project. He was doing with americium. It's a radioactive substance. So in smoke alarms, we need a smoke detector.


There's like a radioactive substance in there and smoke inhibits the ability of the substance to hit a sensor really so he started buying up and you know smoke detectors that he could ever get his hands on right and then got into that he could find I can remember what it was like an old types of clocks. He was finding some radioactive substance and you got himself a geiger counter would drive around with a geiger counter on the front seat of his car passed antique shops and shit, right? Okay, is this a novel? No, this is the it was a variant of the story in Harper's magazine called the radioactive Boy Scout.


He winds up accumulating so much to this shit in the shed that not only like eventually when it all breaks like not only did they haul away the shed. They hauled away like his yard. How many do you have in barrels? How many did I read it a long time ago. Wow. Okay, just doing his thing. Click the smoke - clintus. Oh my God. Look at his face. So this is Christ. Yeah halt the way is yard. Look at his face. Like he's got radiation poisoning his face people might regard you as the radioactive Boy Scout. Yeah, like at a time. You were just out getting some smoke detectors because you want and then over time you like accumulated.


Something where it people had to take notice. There's there's a little bit of that and they would be like dude. I understand but you just can't put that many of those things in one spot. But what's the argument against it the argument against it would tell me are you telling me I don't hold that view point. I'm just saying I like to I like to imagine. My brother has re-emerged as someone who's like highly critical of my occupation and I'd like to hear him out about it Danny or Matt. No Matthew why he is well, give me the counter-argument the what's he critical of you?


So why doesn't he like what I do for a living because he feels that me and other individuals and lots of people that by talking about and celebrating. The ACT an activity in my case Hunting Fishing that it creates that my enthusiasms become infectious and it increases the number of people and diminishes the quality of the experience that that people who've always hunted will have because of competition very valid argument, right? So I like somewhat not know. I like to hear him out on it.


I like to hear about Onyx. He's smart. Yeah, you know, he's smart. So I like to hear him out on Like what? He's thinking? I'm only doing the same thing with you, bye-bye. I don't hold your opinion. I don't hold the opinion of someone but I'm just saying like it is someone might say I get it Joe. It was all fun. It wasn't supposed to happen, but they would say like but here you are the plug like here you are you now have a level of power that is I'm that could be dangerous, but what could be dangerous about it?


Picture that picture that you picture that you said something like it's over now. Nobody was all worried about it happening during the election. But picture that you said like man, I think that if you're in that county you should go down to the polling place and do X. Well a lot of dudes, right? Yeah, so you Um wield like a level of influence and I think that you probably now and then bite your tongue. Well, I definitely don't tell people how to vote. No. No, I don't mean I don't mean how to vote me like that. I was just I was doing a poor example of that's a good example because that we're looks dangerous.


Yeah, like what if I had an idea that was really not well thought out and not good for the general public and I was you through dollars. It was III oxide is funny. Yeah. Yeah, and then I told people Go do it. I thought it'd be fun stunt. Let's see how many people we can get to where you just meet you doesn't using yeah. Yeah, I could see that but now that all that alarms people because people would do it. Yeah, but I don't do that. Most of what I do is talk about ideas and talk shit and talk about things that are happening already. Yeah. I implored people in Missoula County Montana to go vote for my sister-in-law Juanita V. Rho and she won by a landslide. But I think she was going to win. Anyway, that's awesome. That's a good thing.


She's a county commissioner. There you go. I got tangled up in politics there for a minute. There's a real problem with The Gatekeepers is a real problem with these Heavily produced television shows heavily produced radio shows and even now internet shows. There's a real problem with them is that there's an authentic voices. They don't resonate with people. I know that's not a real person. That's not a person that's unfiltered. That's a person that's getting scripts. They wearing makeup. They have a team of people that are attending to them and telling them what to do and how to say it and there's a lot of other people again behind the scenes that are all like paying attention to everything you do and they'll come in and between takes and scenes.


You know, there's There's an interview with Donald Trump with this woman from CBS very contentious interview and he wound up putting the whole interview online. You wear that know this woman was criticizing him and asking him questions and he was like, you know the way you talk to me you never talk to Joe Biden like this and 60 Minutes wound up using a very small percentage. Was it 60 Minutes Jamie? Yeah. They want to be using a very small piece of it, but during the full one. That Donald Trump put out like they interrupt the conversation because one of the producers like the American flag is blowing in the background because the air conditioning is kind of distracting. He's like, well, huh and so the guy likes stops everything because he thinks that the flag is distracting like no one can see the fucking Flag.


It doesn't matter like what are you talking about? But this is what happens when you get a whole crew of people. Yeah, you get so many chefs in the kitchen and some guy just decides. He's going to stop the conversation between the fucking president of the United States. In grilled by this lady because he doesn't like the way a flag is moving that to me symbolize everything that's wrong with a heavily produced Novalee produced television the or one of the things that's wrong. Right? What's really wrong as they push the agenda? They push what you're going to talk about when you'll they'll decide who your guests are the no one has any say and who am I guess our I choose all of them. I choose the day they come in. I choose what we're going to talk about. There's the the conversations are only what I'm interested in things.


I'm interested in. So I don't have to fake anything like I love talking to you as excited to talk to you today. I got excited woke up this morning. I ride Stephen l was gonna be here. There's no like oh, who do we have to talk to today? That shit never happens. Yeah. That's why it resonates all these shows where it's heavily produced and and you know, you just trying to get the biggest celebrities in and like there's a really disturbing video from of Howard Stern for my 2013 that some of the leaked and it's him giving some speech in front of all of his employees talking about Getting the show to become more popular. This is what we have to do and we have to get you know, x amount of celebrity need to a list and to be list a week and I was like, wow.


Oh really? Yeah. Yeah and they're telling people to make fake Twitter profiles and tweet the celebrities and losses like yeah, that's too bad. Yeah exactly. That was my feeling to it as the person who's a gigantic fan of him growing up. It's like I didn't I never thought he thought like that. I never thought anybody would do that. At this is one of the best things about podcasting at least with the way some people do it is just authentic. It's just raw. So when people hear it stumbles and all they know this is just two guys talking. This is two girls talk and sweat it like that that show what is that called the caller Daddy?


Yeah. Yeah that became real popular because it's obviously just the way these chicks are talking. They just talk that way they and people like, oh my God like this is how we talk when With our friends and they people it resonates with them. You can't get that on The View. You can't get that on these heavily produced bullshit shows that are on television. We have a million producers and everybody Cuts in between commercials and fixes people's hair and your super self-aware. That's what happens in those goddamn things. It's weird. No people come in with notes in a producer is like maybe we can bring up this in this episode. I know you like to talk about this but let's be aware that people think that you think this and this is a is that when into the we've got it shows that when when you talk about this people to now so we got to stop talking about that.


So they show like this all this research and all these metrics and like they fuck it. It gets all fucked up what resonates with people is authentic authentic conversations and you don't get authenticity when you have overly produced things with a hundred people's ideas. I'll shoved into one person's mouth you do it doesn't work that way that so the more these podcasts get bigger and bigger. Where they fought they fall apart because too many people get involved. You've too many people shift them and mold them and change them and then they become just like everything else all these other overproduced things and look there's some overproduced things that are really good. You know The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson you could watch it to this day.


Like wow, that's so fucking really good show, but it wouldn't work today wouldn't because now it's like you have water in your ears. No and you don't know you have water in here and then it comes out you like. Oh that's what hearing was like I can hear better. There's some put that water back in here you like The fuck's that water doing in there. I know what it's like to have no water in my ear now. Yeah, that's a bad analogy. But you get what I'm saying. I'm getting what you're saying. People are they're accustomed to this thing. Now where you you know, that's just there's no filter between you and that person. You're in the room. Like that's how I feel when I listen to your show like it's you and whoever's in there with you. That's it does know like why don't show that I really liked I liked a lot of shows but one show that I really liked was when we talked to the author.


Book got turned into the Revenant. Yeah. Yeah, Michael Punk that that's a great LP u n ke. Yeah, that's a great one. I came up. No, I think it's I think he doesn't pronounce thee shit. I don't think honk honk I think it's Punk. Yeah, damn. Sorry Michael, but you cause you have such a great knowledge of that subject. And you know, he he does as well and you're asking what what is this? What is that? What was it like for you when they instead of doing it on the planes they decide to do in a rain forest in the Pacific Northwest. Like what the fuck was that like and you're talking to him like it's real clear. There's this is just you and that guy and you know yanis and whoever else is there this is No Agenda, there's no filters is no producers.


So it's intrigued to a person because it resonates it gets in the head. He's is slides right in there that that story though is a little bit in some ways might have a little bit to do with a sense of responsibility or something because I had taken so many swipes over the years at my distant swipes that the movie the Revenant right and voice my dissatisfaction with that movie so much that I believe it went like this. I believe the author then reached out or friend of the author reached out to say, you know.


Really aware of your how much fun you guys have with the movie and I was like da probably have the guy but it was because of historical inaccuracies, right? It was no fault of his that's why I tried to make clear like he I think what it is. I don't think he lives. I think he heard that we're always hacking on them. He thought we were hacking on him on him. And I was like, I'm not hacking on him. We're hacking on the movie The fact and then I wanted to get rid of this. I wanted to get with them to be cool. Is it always a problem when someone takes a movie that's based on a real historical event and they distort that historical event just for film just for like an example that I always use is that movie drink was a dream catcher was that was the move it foxcatcher foxcatcher.


Oh, yeah. Yeah the wrestling. Yes Olympic wrestling team movie based on a real wrestler Mark Schultz who fought in the UFC and in the A lot of things take place that I don't know whether or not they took place because I am not intimately connected to the movie but I'm intimately connected with the UFC and when Mark fought in the UFC fought a famous fighter, it's a famous fight. It's a historical fight. He fought as a wrestler against the guy named Big Daddy Goodrich. Gary Goodridge was a famous fighters a famous Pioneer of the sport. Okay in the movie The only fight that Mark has ever had his entire career MMA fight in the UFC in the movie. He fights a Russian guy. Why Guy like they change it instead of Big Daddy's day and do the Rocky I'd fight.


No, but it was the same deal. But but they took a historical event and they distorted it for no reason like you could have had him fighting Big Daddy Goodrich. You could have had big cat because Big Daddy also wore Aggie. He famously would go into into the octagon with a karate outfit on so he had his his his Geon and in the movie. There's a guy with a fucking bear shirt a white guy like or bare-chested. Make any sense. Like why would you change reality as an MMA fan? I know what happened but gets a historic fight. It would be like when Muhammad Ali fought Sonny Liston If instead of Sonny Liston, you haven't fight some fat white guy.


Yeah. Why would you do that when everybody knows what happened? So that's a historic movie where someone exactly we're talking about with podcast with anything else overproduced. Someone got their greasy little fucking fingers on it, and they Added to change reality. I think that It comes from a couple places and I've been witness to a little bit. I think it comes from people wanting to exert creative influence. Yeah, and also people three things why do desert creative influence wishing that the truth had been different?


That doesn't make any sense. Well, yeah and a third one. That's kind of like to combine with the second one. But today what which things have been different be like, I remember actually having a conversation like this with a producer one time about, you know, filming hunting things. We're like, well, how do you do it? You know, like how do you like cut this thing up? Maybe like man, you would do it with us, you know, you could do what the scalpel right? It's like very precise. I use a very small knife to do it and no joke being like could you do it with a machete? Because in their mind, there's not the respect.


There's not the respect for how things are done. It's so show business that you're viewing. You're not in love with how someone did something you're in love with like what the end product could be visualized as meaning it's more arresting and their mind to see someone cut something up with a machete like they can picture it, right. So why be inhibited why be inhibited by the reality and I think a lot of people would other would like be like, oh no shit. You could do that with a scalpel, right and they love that fact. Yeah. But some people don't love that fact. Well we're talking about was this little handle on type knives those when I first saw that I go that's genius and I thought oh, of course, it makes sense like your surgically cutting up parts of an animal.


It does make sense. But the difference between that is like this is a physical act that hasn't taken place yet. You're about to do it and you going to film it. We're talking about as a historical event. Yeah, and that's where it's real problem. Especially for someone who's a mean. I'm kind of a martial arts historian you ask me. Out the UFC I and I know a lot like you can't lie to me. You can't say that Mark Schultz fought some Russian guy. Like that's that's nonsense. It doesn't make any sense that is just a producer who thinks a people mile know people will know just do it in. Yeah, that sums guys ego. Well, no, no Gary see fingered motherfucker wants to come in and ruin something because he has his own ideas of how to you know, had a put his little touch in it.


He thought I turned it into the white guy like you He's sitting in the movie theater. This was my idea. They wanted to give it a black guy from Canada wearing Aggie that's is Big Daddy. Goodrich's from Toronto. I mean Big Daddy goodrich's famous. That's why this is crazy. Yeah, like Mark Schultz is famous to like, this is the first time an Olympic gold medalist in wrestling competed in the UFC. We got to see this insanely dominant wrestling. Like, where's just took him down anytime you want it to and just just completely controlled the fight. It was really fascinating and because he was a coach for brig Young believers Brigham Young University, they told me can't keep fighting. Like if you're gonna coach wrestling you can't do this cage fighting thing because this is early you have seen no gloves.


You can wear shoes like it was the rules were like real squirrelly. It was a totally different thing than it is now is one way I mean, maybe two weight classes back then one or two weight classes, that's it. And so for them, it was like distasteful. Whereas now maybe they would look at that as an opportunity to get amazing publicity for sure. Yeah, the college look our Guys UFC champion because Mark Schultz could have been a UFC champion. No doubt about it. No one was going to stop that guy from taking them down. I mean, he was like one of the best wrestlers to ever wrestle and they he was the one played by not Mark Ruffalo Mark Ruffalo is the older brother. Yes, right Mark Ruffalo the older brother the older brother Dave Schultz had get murdered by this Japonica.


Yeah. Yeah. It's a crazy story. Do you are you familiar with the the Charlton Heston movie I believe is from 80 called the mountain men. No, it's a period piece about free Trappers, you know Mount like Beaver Traverse a some real humans just informed from a hodgepodge of events informed by a hodgepodge of actual events. So there's an element in there very detailed elements stolen from John coulter's


life of an event called come to be known as Colter's run. There's some there's some characters Bitter these amalgams of different people who kind of drifted in and out of that time and the 1830s and 1840s. They do a great job with costumes, but the beaver trap their Beaver Trappers the trapping scenes. our in like laughably bad and you wonder why they didn't just bring someone in to have them like it has been so even less effort to have the beaver sets. They're making make sense, but they're like they just someone out there just doesn't care. They don't care. I had a conversation with one of those movies where all the Native Americans are. Well except for the heroin like the Native Americans are blue. Enduring idiots. Oh God. Yeah. What year was this? I believe was made 1980. Yeah, there it is. Yeah, I had a conversation once when I was just starting to get into acting I had I think maybe I'd just been cast in the news radio and I've got brought maybe not even I've been brought in to meet with these producers because they knew how to martial arts background. They want to talk about me doing a martial arts movie. The interview did not go very well because because they were talking about things in movies like all these Wild scenes and and they were asking me what I like and I go why I like things that are realistic I want I want to see something that I know would work like if a guy you know jumps up and split kicks to people and knocks him across the


room like that doesn't I don't I go. I want to see like realistic scenarios where a person who knows martial arts can go all that. That's pretty badass like like Chuck Norris give him all the shit you want but there's a lot of Chuck Norris movies. And we had like real realistic fight scenes. Yeah, like what was the cop movie Chuck Norris? Did Lone Wolf McQuade now. That was the one we fought David Carradine. There was a then he fights. Yeah, like no matter like they killed his dog and he got pissed that was pushing it too far. There was one movie with it. Where Chuck Norris. Did God's Not The Thin Blue Line is it?


What does it Code of Silence? That's right. That was a movie. It was a real movie. Like it wasn't it wasn't just like a karate movie. It was like a real movie was a good it was like critically it currently has probably 1980 as well. Like what year was that movie here isn't a bar next to this takes do jokes. He's by a pool table getting ready to cry you fight 85. Yeah. I was you got everything you like he wasn't too outrageous. It was like he was really fighting like it made sense. Like you could see that happening. Maybe that's not the best example, you know, who's a good example is weird is it? Sounds Steven Seagal is early movie. Hmm Above the Law a lot of people hate saying that I fucking loved above the law that Steven Seagal movie when he fuck people up in a bar like you believed it.


Yeah. I'm like, he's not doing jumping Spinning Wheel kicks or anything like that. He's cracking people over the head with pool cues and breaking their arms. It's like that all that stuff. Okay, I'd buy that I buy that I would someday like you to do like an analysis Aid sort of director's cut style analysis of the Scene at the end of Cannonball Run This is Steven Seagal walking in dude. This was back when he was lean. I met him and I met him in a catfish joint in Oxford, Mississippi a catfish plan is they're getting fried catfish. Really. Do you remember when he was a real cop on a television show people got with mouthy with him in this movie and this is not a good move bang starts fucking people up see that look at that elbow that upward elbow hundred percent legit hundred.


Sent real move that you see in Muay Thai all the time. That's real. That's the Kevin Ross could be doing that right now right there bam. That's a hundred percent ribs legit need of the the face all legit. That stuff makes sense. Like this guy's going to swing. Boom all this shit. This is real. This is this is Steven Seagal at his best. These are like legit believable fight scenes own eyes and get the watch this even the way like, why is it Steven Seagal people talk a lot of shit about him and Stevens. It was a league jit Aikido Master like he was one of the first if not the first American to teach at a dojo in Japan. He taught Akito.


He was a hundred percent legit when I met him he was wearing some kind of robe. He lost the script somewhere long life. But back then during this movie man. I fucking love that guy and I remember bringing him up in the meeting and I'm bringing this scene up and like that's that's what I want to say. I don't want to see shit that I know won't work and they weren't into it and they were like people don't know that I go but I know that because yeah, but how many people are you like you are out there, you know I go but that movies and successful moving in the guy got upset at me. Yeah, you just didn't want to hear me criticizing his perspective on something that I was an actual expert in has GQ asked you to do one of those breakdowns which what of a karate scene in the movie. Well, no, they like I've done the breakdown where you watch all the hunting scenes, how have you done that?


Yeah. Yeah fun. I'd probably do that without GQ. I don't want them in the Don't need them in there. I would I want why would I want anybody else in there? Then you have a producer. Then you have a big organization behind you when you can just do it here. You could just spark up a joint go. Yeah, right. If yeah, well for they can like pull the I don't know why I didn't I had fun they get the rights to things. Maybe well, it's just like the kind of like put it on. I don't know it was like they played they pulled all the and I actually pointed out a bunch of hunting scenes in movies for them. And then they did their homework and found a bunch more and they just play it hunting scenes from movies Cameron Haynes did that with archery and that's correct.


And you know what he said to me. He said the best is that movie Brave That animated movie. He's like the girls form is excellent that right, which it does everything perfect. Like because it's animated. You don't have to teach an actor to do it. You could just mimic like a professional Archer doing it. Like see if you can find like a seen the archery seen in Brave. Well, what do you do with them or not? I feel like I'm a good fight scene breakdown would like would would be it like a gift to society maybe but that like that scene in Above the Law. That's All legit, like maybe not the the flipping the guy on the ground that was holding the gun. Let me see if we can see the girl pull the boat to be a good parody.


Look at this. Watch this watch her go her technique. I mean even the way she's holding the bow. It looks like a real human. Oh, she's got some corset that's holding her bag. Look at that. Look at that. I mean her technique looks perfect. Oh, they must look. I mean, that wasn't your right looks good. What I wanted to do. So this this franchise Ours is GQ franchise is called the breakdown. I wanted to do a parody of the breakdown where an expert comes in and analyzes diarrhea scenes from movies. Well, that would never actually happen because like the scene from what was the movie? Yeah, Dumb and Dumber was yeah.


Well, you know that that volume of excrement but never actually generated by a human sized head you'd be dead. Yeah, but there's something about people when you get too many people too many minds too many too many too much influence, you know, just that it was the thing that things that point was the thing that oh toilet scene. So does the thing that shocked me originally about doing about doing books is I remember to this is not to discredit my agent but I remember having a conversation with my publisher. We kind of like over lunch one time hit and hit on and I Dia for a book and she seemed to like agree with the idea and it's just two of us in a room and she had she had an imprint and could make that call at random house and We're like talking.


I'm like, you know, I think you're really cool and I left the lunch. and called my agent said like I think I maybe just kind of sold a book, you know, you should call and double-check and to think that like a thing of that level of impact would come about which is that I'm gonna be really inspired by that. That's what should happen. Right? Yeah, but that's like a the amount of people that are going to go read a book. So there you put a thing out that you feel as of influence. Yeah a fraction of a fraction of what is going to hear you talk. Yeah, and there's and there's not even to people in the conversation about who you're going to talk to.


Yeah. It's weird you've reduced. Sit you've reduced it down to a single point, but people know what to expect like people that listen to the show. Like I'm my my ideas evolve. Yeah, I get interested in new things, but I'm always me. You know, it's not as I'm not a product. I'm not a thing that someone has concocted. I'm not a thing that someone like when there's certain people that are on like late night television, we hear them talk you'll man I want to get that guy drunk. Yeah. I want to know what that guy's got you like I don't Buy it. I don't buy it with me if you like me or don't like me, you know exactly what I am and also it's not a lot of men that are allowed to just be like a regular man on TV anymore or on anything.


What are they supposed to be like you got to be some fucking half neutered thing? Oh, you know, you have to know all all evidence of toxic masculinity must be removed from the way you think and behave you can't be like a guy would be if Hanging out with his friends. Like that's problematic. It's problematic to distribute mainstream. Like there's so many men out there that feel like they don't have anybody that represents the way they think so one of the things I think that resonates with the show is because there's no filter because there's no there's no Executives at tell you what to do. I could just be myself. Yeah. There's a lot of people like me out there to your credit.


I think that you're very very open about the I the evolution of your thought and you're very open about Ideas that you're not trying on but you're open about your thought process. Meaning that you'll voice something and and do a good job of voicing that you're aware that there's probably more to the story. Yeah you have well, I'm not married to my ideas. I think that's important to us. I think there's like there's like a sub there's like a subtext there and I think that someone could even look at transcripts of what like could look at transcripts of what you say and not and get a false idea of it or if they listen to you.


It would carry with it the lack of like the lack of sleep. Certainty as you hear a new piece of information and discuss it right. I see what you're saying, which is a little bit important when people are always mad about something Trump said like you go to the New York Times read like Trump said this horrible thing and then you go and find the video. Exactly, like for instance. I remember one everybody's all worked up because Trump referred to Pompeo at you know, as the secretary of the deep state which I thought was funny. Okay? Yeah, everybody's all angry about it. Well, you know the magnitude then you go watch the video like the dudes make is like you just make a joke.


That is funny. Yeah. It was like everything about the interaction was a joke that was in the interview with The same sort of thing the interview with CBS the woman brought up a things like that's not what I said. What I said was a joke. I was joking. I said it like this. This is I'm joking. I'm being sarcastic. I'm being silly. That's what I do. Yeah, but he was saying that explaining to her like you're saying it in a different way than I said if it's not how I said it like she was trying to say a thing in her words like you said and she says it this way is like that's not what I said. I said it like this and he says it the way he said it and you go. Oh, he's fucking around. Yeah. But they're trying to distort what he said because it makes a better narrative The Narrative that he's an asshole.


I could go on all night. I don't get it too much, but I could go on all day about legitimate complaint. Someone might have with like the administration but the thing about him like the thing about him saying funny things and that making people mad like I really don't I kind of a little bit appreciate the humor sometimes he's an awesome troll mean that's one of the ways he got so much attention during the 2016 election. He would say out. He's a shit knowing that the media was going to complain about it and they were just giving him free advertising because he was saying things you're not supposed to say when you're running for president. And when he was saying they like this is outrageous and they thought they were sinking him. They're like we're going to show what a bad person he is and people would watch him saying they play them for fools man.


They gave him free advertising. You know, it's a we're in a weird place where people that might listen to this someday. No one knows who the president is right. Now the election has been Ben went on last night, but it hasn't been decided and it might not be decided for three or four days. They think that Pennsylvania is the big one and they don't know who's going to win Pennsylvania. And if he wins Pennsylvania, apparently he wins maybe if he wins one other state in Pennsylvania he wins but if he loses Pennsylvania Biden wins and could be real weird. Do you think you'll launch a do you think your run for president someday me no fucking chance. That's a terrible job. It seems like they just distorted.


Who you are? They they push a narrative they say things about you that are horrible. They do ads whether just trying to break down your character. Yeah and depends on who the establishment is for or against I mean what they're doing with Biden has been extraordinarily weird where they're ignoring all of his gaffes. They're ignoring all of these like really real legitimate. I don't think you can say they're ignoring his gasps mego watch Gaff compilations. Yeah, but not on CBS Osama NBC not as and not his allies anybody who is in the news is not in the news you're in the news you're in the business of Distributing the news you want people to see yeah, like you don't want people to see him thinking he's running for Senate.


He's like, well the reason why I'm running for Senator, you know, like like you don't want to hear that so they don't show it they take away all the times he forgets what he's talking about. They don't say they don't there's no thing that they've ever had on CNN is where they have. Legitimate conversation and whether or not he can hang in there for four years forget about eight like how much cognitive decline has this man experience. You don't feel that they discussed that not on CNN. No. No, they haven't they avoid it like the plague. They avoided the hundred Biden emails. They avoided all that they avoid so much they avoid so many different things that would be detrimental to him because in large part because they believe they covered that stuff too much in 2016 with Hillary when it came to the emails and deleting the 30,000 emails and on then the FBI reopening the investigation right before the election and that could have cost her and they've decided their approach this time.


They decided that Trump is bad and he's a danger to democracy. And so they're only gonna cover the news that they think is important. Well the problem with that is then you you open up the door to Fox News be able to say why aren't these other people covering this? They're not covering this because they're biased and it's fake news and these these people are criminals. This is all legit. This is all Happening right now. This is real stuff. Here's Joe Biden stumbling. Here's Joe Biden, you know saying things that don't make any sense. Here's Joba over and over and over again, you know, you don't vote for me. You ain't black all that crazy stuff than not they're not highlighting all super Thursday. Yeah, it's he's a Madman. Yeah. It's like it's weird but it shows you that the news is not just a news.


It's the news for the left and the news for the right. You don't just get I think the by a source I think that it's a little I think that people who aren't on that are either feigning ignorance, like like people who don't think that there is an inherent bias within news organizations within long-term Legacy news organizations there either like fainting in trout feigning ignorance because it benefits them or they're just flat out like like naive but there's never been this obvious where they're just ignoring really hard. I want someone to be president if they can't think right right.


Yes. I'm showing a real clear sign of cognitive decline. You don't you're supposed to highlight that like this is part of the news, but they had already picked him to be the guy running for the Democratic party and they just they just decided to just ignore all that shit. Yeah, but like I read the New York Times so I don't just go after what you were saying that. I'm reading updates. Now, they'll as of now they've called Wisconsin for Biden Arizona has not officially been called, but I'm seeing that it's called and if he just wins Nevada and Michigan which he's currently up and that's enough to give him to 70. It doesn't matter about PA matter about Pennsylvania at that moment.


So Biden's going to win that I don't know. That's the part of like I've heard last night. I think it was Karl Rove. Actually that was saying on Fox news that this reporting number. Is not accurate because they have no idea how many people voted right now and how many mail-in ballots are in early ballots are sitting out there. So saying that like 99 percent or 95 percent is in that might not be a good accurate number to go off of this for which state any of this adding the states. Yes are the closest ones right now are Nevada, Michigan and Georgia. Wow, it's look how close they are. Oh, dude, they're down to reporting like like chunks of 3,000 votes. It's fucking nuts, man. From Administration. I think I said they're already filed a lawsuit to stop the counting and Michigan.


What does that mean? I don't know. Why every that's why I understand how you like. Why would you want to stop counting on our say like, how can you justify the art with you want to stop counting? Yeah, but they want to keep counting in Arizona. But what's the art? Like I wish I understood what is good. And what do they mean? Stop counting? I don't know. So it looks like Arizona's lost fifty one percent to 47 percent. That's a Yeah, left a hundred thousand Gap with 80. Well, it's only 84 so they have 16% of the possible vote out there. Yeah, but what's pissing off Trump though is was pissing off his team. Is that what they're counting our mailings and malins are Democrats were more likely to vote Malin.


Yeah, right. So that's like I'm sure you already know. Yeah. Yeah, that's his gripe about these things that are laying around and I think that he thinks they're just going to start making them up. He tweeted earlier like He's like they keep finding Biden votes and all these states like yeah, it's like someone's going to find four thousand Biden Vault somewhere Donald sure. It's also made weird rules in some states where you this signature on the envelope does not have to match the actual person signature like when you sign the envelope for a mail-in ballot, really they my I know my midterm ballot got thrown away because it didn't look like your signature. I gotta know. I was out of town. I got a call.


Problem my ballot by the time I got back it was over and I didn't get counted and they say why yeah, it was like I didn't thought I didn't sign and date it right or send didn't sign and date where I was supposed to sign and date. So I'm and he well I thought I was I was like quite pleased with democracy the fact that they tried to call me to rectify the situation. I would've had like do a bunch of stuff and be no wait. I get part of nudism the way have enough time to do everything I need to do but the fact that some dude like place a call to be like bro your votes not counting. Wow you call back or do you got Do X Y and Z in a hurry to get your vote and I missed find wins Wisconsin Fox News projects limiting Trump's chances of reaching 270 electoral votes. Wow. So if Biden won Wisconsin Wisconsin's in so it's kind of over right?


Hmm as lost 300 bucks. It's interesting that Arizona went blue. That's interesting. I mean, California always goes blue. Oregon always goes blow that all make sense Washington that makes sense. You know, it's funny that what's not happening at is when we set this date Joe we say here and talked about that America would be on fire as we record this. I think the waiting to find out what the results are and then then they light the fuse. They can't start the fire yet. They might have one like both sides. Yeah, you know like the Trump people they like, I'm not sure if I'm mad yet and then you know the Biden people o z 1 What's Happening Here No One Knows once decided once it goes to court that's going to be a shitshow.


Is it a party like the different way the different camps if there is like a court and a dispute the different camps like that. The one impulse is to mount a giant flag on your truck. And get other dudes in trucks to Roar around but that's only the Trump people. I don't know something like that's one Camp. Okay one Camp would be a I have a friend who has a student who has a husband in the military and he described these rolling motorcades as Vanilla Ice's why Vanilla Ice's because it really was he served and it reminded him of the Isis Flags in the back of trucks. Vanilla Isis. That's hilarious that was his depiction of it.


But the other Camp is You and the other Camp when you're mad like you go to like you go that you march downtown. You know, it's like this the to sort of like playbooks, you know are just very different. Yeah ones in a car once marching. Yeah ones like a display ya like it like I don't think that anyone that will get if no one is going to get mad about the by like no Biden person will put a big bite and flag on their truck. Yeah and drive aggressively on a highway. No, here's my take on Trump. People aren't going to go downtown. No no Arch and not with other cars. Wonder what what like who's what side is in worse shape to March?


The Biden people the Trump people are who would have liked worst backs and fucked-up knee. Oh that's impossible to say, you know, I like right now, it's not about that responsibility thing man. I write like I don't know if you I feel like you probably don't feel this. I right now I'm kind of like grieving for America a little bit not about how the reflection might twist, but I'm grieving for America about if the polarisation is true. And I sometimes question whether it's true or not because when I go out I just have like I've been talked about this all the time lately when I go out about in my community and elsewhere sitting here right now, whatever.


I have like very positive interactions with my fellow Americans when I go to the gas station, they're going to buy some shit. It's like I Come Away happy. That's my people. Yeah, when I go talk to my neighbors who I've like I legitimately my neighbors around me. I have no idea who they're voting for. I really don't know. I actually don't care when I go and talk to my neighbors. There's like a love right but then all I hear about is the ripping apart and I'm like either I'm in the dark and it's ripping apart and I'm like too stupid to notice it but I do like I do. Like I'm a little scared. I'm a little scared as well.


Did you watch the social dilemma and Netflix we've been in our old people with kids way watching it in 15 minutes sharma's. Yeah. It's like we have a TV in our bedroom, but now nothing like when I'm home, we like watch 15 minutes of it on a cell phone. I have no idea why my twelve-year-old daughters. This is the dumbest thing I've ever seen. She hated it. We try to make her watch it because I just wanted her to understand. Yeah the day Jurors, and the dilemmas of social media but to her social media is awesome. I like Tick-Tock. She's Tick-Tock and shit. Yeah that with her friends. She only sees the positive sides of it. What I was trying to get her to see is like obviously she has no interest at all in politics.


She's no wonder she doesn't understand the division that's happening in this country because people live in these Echo Chambers and they argue ideas and the the way social media exacerbates this with their algorithms that Point you towards things that are outrageous pointing point you towards things that piss you off and keep you in this sort of ideological bubble and the people are dividing further and further away from each other and you look at this shift in the way people view the other side, whereas there were so many more people that were sort of Centrist sore, you know had you know a little bit of ideas from the left a little bit of ideas for the right. Now that's very divided very divided and it's directly correlating with the invention.


Social media. Yeah, but if if the division and hatred is only digital. But it spills out obviously does spill out into the real world know you're crooked Portland your I could Seattle you lived in Seattle for a while. Did you ever have imagined that they would take over a six-block area of Seattle? Yes, you really did you thought they could was I felt like I could definitely see it because I when I was there there was enormous enormous around amount of tension around the homeless crisis in Seattle that loitering laws.


Camping laws were just suspended. And they would go into an encampment like a whatever know what you call. I wish I knew the proper term from good going to an illegal encampment or whatever and move everybody out actually scrape the top soil away because the needles and stuff whatever scrape the top soil away pull out and people just move back in and it was a lot of tension about this and it was that some people are like why why don't we why can't we enforce like why don't we enforce the law and people being like well, You know, it's like inhumane to people who are in need and it was like an emerging tension there.


So to have it later be that you saw that kind of like blow up on this grand national scale doesn't surprise me after seeing like that level of just consternation from people who've been there a long time about why do I have this feeling that there's like laws that I'm held to but some people are just not held to a law and this is pre covid when you were living there. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so like being witness to that and hearing the amount of of griping about that and then seeing it. No, I'm not like wow, that's no it felt very like almost not like not at all surprising.


Hmm did that it happened? Yeah, I think there's places in this country that have like legitimate almost unfixable issues with homeless people. Sure Los Angeles is On one of them Los Angeles when I first moved there in 94 was nothing like this. Nothing. There was no tense ever. There's no Universal tense. Now my friend sent me a video where she was driving down to the in Venice and she held her phone up out the window and it is a mild plus of tents. Just nothing but tense it's crazy. Like you look at it. You're looking at thousands of tents like this is insane. How do you put the lid on that? How do you get those people? Out of there. Where do you put them?


How do you clean that area? I mean it's disgusting and you're talking about Venice which is like a very wealthy area is a lot of money in Venice is a lot of beautiful houses. You're on the beach and they're fucked. It's fucked. I was going to a restaurant there with my wife and we stopped at a red light and there's this beautiful house the left public millions of dollars right to the right 10 tenths right across the street from the fucking house like a small Road and then homeless and Camp across the street from this beautiful house. Like what the fuck and I talk to people that are there and like know we have ring those little ring doorbell things with the videos constantly seeing people stealing shit companies be seeing people breaking into the yard trying to get into their house wandering in their backyard trying to get into the garage.


It's like and they there's no Solutions the government doesn't do a goddamn thing about it. Yeah, I've got input on all kinds of things. But I'm like low on input on that. I have zero. We did a our company we did a river. Like a river access Park clean up when picked up all kinds of garbage at a river access near are near where we work and there was a homeless encampment there in the woods at the river access remember being like very I was kind of scared because I was like, it's super rude to go and like pick up garbage and sort of like act like there aren't people camp there right and and not acknowledge these human beings like you would in.


You know if there was people there fishing or people are having a picnic you would engage, right, right. So I'm like, why do I feel like chicken shit about engaging? Mmm. So now I go up and guys. I know it's gonna seem like we're kind of like open your business. We're doing cleanup projects backing up garbage and Hauling way dudes. Like hey, give us a couple bags. They take some bags full of garbage set it on the trail. We all the way and like for a week. I've been like plotting how I'm gonna it was easy just like it's just yeah, we have this there was like it was like he got this is writer Jeff Jeff died. He wrote this book yoga for people who can't be bothered to do it.


Jeff Dyer he was a humorist and where he had this essay he wrote about struggling with his desire to witness great poverty when he would travel. He's a professional traveler, you know, and you'd go to India and he would he struggled with why do I want to go? Like is it bad? Like, what is it that I want to go Witness? Behold the spectacle of poverty. Mmm You know, yeah instead of like most people don't put that in there travel itinerary.


Hmm, so he would specifically do that on purpose. Yeah. He talks about his book. Why do I like those kind of why do I like that? It's definitely a perspective changer, right? You start thinking you have problems and you go see people with real problems. Like whoa. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. But homeless people in this country. It used to be a different thing, you know, it used to be all people that were drug addicts or all people that were mentally ill but I think with covid you've got people that just had nowhere else to go. There's a lot of people that they might be homeless right now, but they don't want to be they just don't know what to do. I think there's I think that number is bigger than it's ever been before and that's what makes it even scarier.


And that's one of the reasons why something like Universal basic income is interesting to me, you know. Not interested in letting the government take our taxes and and and do things too. Like you don't get a receipt for where your taxes go, right? You don't know how much your taxes are going to frivolous things or things that don't make any sense or things you don't agree with but if I knew that my taxes were going to very specific things that I agree with I wouldn't have a problem pay more taxes. Never Ross Perot. He's make a little chart showing where your money went scared the shit out of everybody. He's the reason why Bush didn't win a second term at Herbert Walker Bush. That was the first time it less Trump loses in modern history where a president didn't win a second term the first time well Carter and then Herbert Walker Bush it because they saw that Ross Perot thing.


He took a he bought a half hour of regular television back when there is no internet is like I'm gonna show you what's going on here here. Look at this chart is where you got that money goes and he was telling people like what the fuck Ikea opened up a lot of people's eyes to what the IRS is and where your money goes and why it's dirty. Yeah scare the shit out of people. So weird time to be alive Steve I'm not I don't I'm worried about the future of this country to I'm worried about in a way that I've never been worried before. Yeah, I like I just like like America so much. I was having a conversation with some recently where they're kind of like challenging that like challenging why?


Challenging why you could be why you can feel proud about being in a like a citizen of a country where you just were born there and you just live there because you're born there. It's like how can you be proud of that? You're just born there right? I'm like man. I can't really suss it out. But I feel like it's like I have like a sort of like a sense of Pride and patriotism and to and so I like worried about the country in a way like what it feels like for people like I worry about like what it feels like for people to be American and knowing that their people at a point that early even challenging the idea of taking pride in that like that's a sign of something bad and also people who conversely are taking their deep sense of Pride and love and using it to leverage and diminish.


Other people here's a sort of like, I love it more or I have more of a right to love it. And I even like the fact that to either lack patriotism or conversely to weaponize patriotism. It all makes me feel like a little like, I'm a little skittish right now. I'm right. I know it's saying I want to know if there's a this is true because almost saying that Google and Facebook both remove the ability to have an American flag emoji that cannot be true. Don't know as read it. Just Google that that's just look just I don't know just Google that Google like it going if you want to leave a comment Leti to have a American flag Emoji.


Yeah, like - Twitter like you put a series of American flags and thumbs up. Yeah exact. Come on can't do anymore. I don't do much. I don't know if it's literally don't know if it's true. I read it and I was like what I was running out the door. I was like what? Look I get where people would say you had no say and being American. Why would you be proud of that? You should be proud of things. You've accomplished. You should be proud of things. You worked hard towards but what America stands for I feel super lucky to be an American. I think America stands for an incredible amount of innovation incredible contribution to music and art and comedy and just just the overall impact that's had on the culture of the world for a country.


That's just a little over. Hundred years old is phenomenal. It's insane. I mean, I think I think this is the greatest experiment in self-government and then getting a bunch of people to live together. And then what kind of impact it has on the rest of the world ever? Yeah. I mean, it's an amazing place to be Ida conversate. Oh, sorry go. I was gonna say I just think right now people are concentrating only on the negative aspects on I had a conversation recently with someone who'd built over the course of Life. They built a billion-dollar business. Yes and hardly critical the government highly critical of government while simultaneously building a billion dollar business telling me he feels no patriotism.


I'm like fucking you don't feel any patriotism dude. You can't really do impact on your you've hacked on the government the whole time and built a successful business. You don't meet his little magic in that. Yeah that to be in a place where that can go down. Well the guy's pretty cool. It's not ideal. No, but it's pretty cool to be able to live. Yeah. Ideally, you know, I just feel like you'd be like man this place Great. I hacked on the government whole career and made a bunch of money. Yeah, and no one shows up to beat me up. Did that in China? You'd be dead. Yeah, damn it. There's places in yeah, it's places in the world right now, or if you did the exact same thing, they literally come for you and kill you, you know, we were talking yesterday on the podcast about this wrestler in Iran.


That is a world champion wrestler who they executed because he participated in a peaceful protest. Hmm and the UFC tried to plea make a A plea to the Iranian government to do not kill them and they fucking killed them. Anyway, they wanted to send a nice message. This guy was a national sports hero and they want to send a nice message. We don't give a fuck what you are you are you are under us. Yeah, we are a powerful theocracy and will fucking kill you and they did. Yeah. Yeah, that's happening right now. That's 2020 somewhere else, you know as bad as it is here and it is it's not ideals government's not ideal.


So this is not perfect. We can get an old man who can't talk to another guy's full of shit and they're the only people we have to choose from no, that's not good. That's not good, you know in there are other choices I voted for Joe Jorgensen. I don't voted for the libertarian candidate even though I knew she was going to win. I mean I voted for in California where it said no chances. Yeah, I think That's a that's a very interested to hear you did that because I had to an astonishing astonishingly similar thought process as I filled out. My ballot is to live in Lick in a state where there's not any question about where it's going to go and to try to support Lee not necessarily like the libertarian party, but try to support the idea that you'd have a viable third-party.


Party of some sort we need that. It doesn't just happen to it doesn't have to fall into this this crazy system of of like this like this like collection of thoughts and this other collection of thoughts and you pick between those two. That's it. That's all you got. So many I thought that like any effort you could lend the idea of a third seat at the table would however, you know, you're pissing into the wind still man. Yeah, you have those two two schools of thought and these two schools. Solder both funded by the same fucking people. I mean that's that's what's hilarious about it all it's they're all funded by gigantic businesses. It's not ideal.


It's not good and the the idea of a third party candidate gets mocked mean all the way back to Ross Perot. Just no one. I mean he's about as close as anyways come and he at least took some votes away from the Gary Johnson I voted for him too. Gary Johnson didn't put a dent in it. And he you know, he barely had a chance and I don't think Joe did either but it's one of those things were you gotta you gotta look at it Goldie. Do you agree with this system now, do you just keep going keep going with it every four years. Well, if you know for years is 8 and then 12 and then See how your dead fucks till it's over. You only get a hundred right if you're real lucky and you're not even voting for most of those like when you get to the to the end, like what is Wendy's step up?


Yeah Wendy's day. I don't want to participate in this ridiculous duopoly anymore because that's what it is. I mean and they're both in cahoots with some branch of the media because it's gross and then there's so much money involved and so many people are saddling up to the Abel and influence them whisper in their ear and the making all these compromising deals and I like to think about how long you have left on the planet think you should yeah, I wake up I try to think about that every day y'all like politicians will enter office not make a clock set for like four years or whatever and it counts down. I need to get one of those like for life for like roughly my life expectancy and counts down backwards.


Well, don't you think that your life expectancy? I mean, you are one of the few people that I know that has almost been killed by a grizzly. There wow, that's well. Do you had a real in a situation like in a brush? Yeah something enough where it was scary enough that I now know that I've studied it a fair bit that I now know I had I had a mental I had I had a I had like a like a near-death experience mental a near-death experience mental experience, even though I was unharmed but it jarred my brain so hard it jarred my the this the minute or the seconds that occurred Jarred my brain so hard that as I started as I've tried to be curious about study about what happened in my brain.


It's parallels are all found and it's discussed by people who disgust near-death experiences, which might just mean I'm not like I'm mentally not that I'm not as Tenacious man leaves I'd like to be but I my brain got joggled but don't you think that joggle the word is now don't you think that when you're in contact with an animal that's that large. I mean a predatory animal that's how big was it 10 feet. How big was it really easily? Yeah. I don't want to know are like it was like struck all of us and we've looked at a lot of bears as being like a, you know, a mature brown bear. Okay. So mature Kodiak brown bear. Yeah. That's what we want to talk about. Talk about where you were at a fog. Mac Island, which is a place that has enormous bears that whole part of the world is known for some of the largest brown bears on Earth.


Yeah, it's as I mean, it's separated from Kodiak by an arrow straight. It's like so like the Kodiak brown bear being like the world's biggest barrows is a neighboring Island, but at that specific specimen, you know, I don't know but here animal-based huge just huge. Yeah, when you're around something like that where there can be. No doubt that you can't get out of the way. You can't you can't fight. Off you can't you're helpless. Like it must trigger something in your mind where you you come to grips with the reality of predator and prey that you almost were on the menu. Yeah. There's just no way around that. You can't there's no there's no rationalizations.


You can play in your mind when you're confronted with such absolute superiority. Are you familiar with the term playing possum? Yeah, obviously, so Our understanding of opossums now is that they're not playing? The Conch out, right? Yeah. Yeah stress he's not playing dead he hit such an like he had such a stress level that he shuts off. I'm like embarrassed to admit but I think it's instructive to point out that I was playing possum in that moment, and I don't mean Blaine.


Yeah it like it possum to me out. Let's tell everybody does know the story. Yeah, so real quick v neck Island. Yeah, it has been we've been yapping a long time. But we had we were hunting at Hong elk up in a tree and left it for a day and a half all the meat hanging in the tree and we're Camp few miles away from there and went back to retrieve went bad with a few guys to retrieve the meat out of the tree and Baird found it. and we are very very aware that this might occur and went up and investigated the area around the tree and determined is very haven't found it yet. In fact that the carcass of the animals land not far away.


It was untouched in hindsight. There was a pile of bear shit that had been smeared on the on the ground and I remember looking at that pile bear shit in the wondering if it had been smeared by a bear's foot or smeared by a boot and I determined that look like a been smeared by a boot which would have been we smeared the shit when we were hanging thing the tree and then stupidly like sat down. Launch and within a couple minutes to sit down eat lunch. It came in the bear came in and its open mouth past just 18 inches from my head and I was facing away. So I was the last one to see it. Yeah on this who you know, but he had a pistol he had bear spray, but he hit in the head with a pair of black diamond trekking poles.


He had sat down. He's got spray and set his pistol on his pack. But then when the talked about like playing possum and all the shit that happens there his instinct is the smack it with a tracking poll. Wow, everything you spend all you know, you spend all your time thinking about how you're going to handle this that the other thing. and sometimes it's disappointing that you don't handle stress that well, you know, I just I don't know. I don't know where I went one of our guys I could got run over by a bear rolled it down the hill at that moment.


I snapped out of whatever I was in but I was it shut me down bad. I even noticed. I haven't noticed. There's a thing that happens to people when they get really cold. They enter a sort of a self-fulfilling prophecy mentality when you Get cold if you lose as you start to get really cold like where you get like where you could be in a hypothermic situation people stop doing the obvious things that you would do to get warm. And ice is aware of that as I am as many times as I've experienced that I still see it happen to me.


I still have to snap myself out of it. Like you just like you're getting cold you're getting with argick. You're getting cold more lethargic. The cold is getting worse and it has to be like you can stop you can step in right now and stop this. It's still it's like it still hasn't come naturally. You know what you talk to people who train like you taught me what you trained for this kind of stuff. They eat they have to train. In a very realistic environment that the trained like keep your head. You know just like make good decisions. If you walk into like a active car crash scene or whatever and there's a severed hand laying on the ground right?


Some people are just going to see that hand. And then I can see anything else. Some people are just going to see chaos. They're not going to focus on any particular thing. But like the person come in see the hand see everything around them like a Sasol that it's like it's just from exposure to that super traumatic stuff not to getting colds traumatic, but I do when I look at how I respond to things I do catch that there's like a mentality to practice and learn. it's it's understandable that something like a bear attack would trigger senses and Trigger response that you're just not conditioned for you're not I don't know how you would ever get conditioned to a bear attack.


No. No, I don't know. Yeah, I mean, I'm just a mile and these dudes at the same island. There was some guys some the same island. I think it was later that same year. Some operative some military guys happen to be hunting there. They got tagged by Baron killed got one of got messed up bad when you killed my why'd he kill it? And I did hmm. Maybe they have their gun out, right? You are a weird situation too because you guys were relaxed eating lunch with your guards down. You're sitting there chewing on a sandwich always laughs, you know, I was in the middle of saying what like I was in the middle of a sentence. I'll never forget because some was laughing about why We're putting some sandwiches together in someone was laugh about why my sandwich looks so much nicer than someone else is sandwich.


And I said if you want I was in the middle of saying if you want a sandwich like this get your own fucking TV show, but I was never able to finish the sentence, but I know I was in the middle of saying that when all of a sudden the people around me erupted off the ground. As the like a landmine had gone off underneath us. Whoa, because they saw it. I didn't see it. I was like no way and he came in running all just most scary man. And I've had like, you know Fair bit Fair bit of exposure and and I'm yeah like, I mean relative to most a ton of exposure those things.


I got to expose my ten-year-old kid doing this year a couple times, you know hunting Caribou in Alaska knows it was like Cool to kind of see his thought process. You yeah, you've been exposed to a more than 99.999% of the popular. Yeah, and for it to Rattle you like that those disappointing man because we're always talking about gonna do this now. I'll do that arise like yeah, you know, I actually prefer the 44 over 2/3 because you know, and if I can't get it done with this 13, you know, I got 13 Reasons. He doesn't want to charge me with this semi-auto. It's like all this like Bullshit, you know and I'll send it like hits and like, you know, so whatever the tracking poll.


I've only seen one Grizzly ever in the wild up close and it wasn't a big one. It was like a 6-foot pair. Hmm, but it looked at me in a way that another bear has never looked at me before. Yeah, I've seen black bears black bears. Look at you. Like what are you? Who are you what's going on kind of walk by you like Where's look at people that little weird way? Yeah, they're like denizens of the underbrush man. The grizzly look to me like this. It is locked on me and I was like, oh shit like that is just a different thing. Like it looked at me like yeah. Am I eating you am I going to eat you?


Yeah, there's a mindset probably that comes from there's a mindset that probably comes from just not being challenged. Yeah. And where I was at in Alberta, they you can hunt them. So no one hunts them. So they're they're bigger. They're more Fierce and they have no pressure not you can still in Elbert. Can ya be see you? Can t more be secant, but you cannot Grizzlies in Alberta. Yeah. We got to go Albert. No problem. I'm not I'm not saying everywhere, but I know that they still have something over BC lost its BC losses Grizzly on this is my friends John and Jen. Of it. They were talking about how they're trying to get them to open up some sort of a season because they have a lot of them up there now.


Okay, and because the the woods are so dense, they don't really know how many of them there are but there's so many encounters with people. Yeah, the BC shutdown was very it was political, right? It was very ill. It was like a it was a referendum issue. Yeah, that's a weird one. Right? Because the people that are making that decision they've never had any experience with bears what you talk to the people that actually live in the bush and they'll tell you though tis a lot of Chris Lee's up there. And then there was also a thriving business and industry of people that were guiding up there and you know, they're constantly in contact with them and they're like, you know, this is not this is not a little bit endangered animal. Yeah people that live in proximity to like people that live in proximity to things that are regarded as an endangered tend to have tend to have a different perspective on the abundance than people who look at it from far away.


This is a good time to find this out what happened in Colorado with the walls though. I mean I had to The pass of Jamie can pull it up they had to pass overwhelmingly. Yeah, I know is on track to I know that Utah's right to hunt and fish pass by a landslide constitutional right to hunt fish. What does that mean? 30 some states have it now. They're just like codifying that you have a right to hunt fish and they does use you have teeth but it might in the future or just give away to challenge laws. It's being used right now in Mont like Montana has a right to hunt and fish. Okay, you have a constitutional right to hunt fish. Meaning that that You know a state has a recognized that renewable resources can be like should be allocated to Hunters and Anglers and it's and you want my tasks that will house it ever coming to fruition.


There are there's a lawsuit right now in Montana. There's a lawsuit against the governor and the state who they put a cap. They put a quota on the wolf Harvest and they're being sued by a conservation group who's worried about Steep Decline and Elk numbers. They're being sued by that conservation group that their right to hunt is being infringed upon by a reticence to control wolf numbers to the detriment of big-game hurts. People are usually I think people are supposed to act like apologetic for the fact that they want Wild game resources like it's like, oh, you know we talked about this one individual that you were curious about who is Very instrumental and wolf reintroductions and he refers to honours as the recreational big game killing industry and it's kind of like a swipe at people who sort of acting like it's not a legitimate perspective to want there to be deer elk moose Caribou to eat and use I'm like very Unapologetic about my view that I want there to be a lot of deer elk.


Whatever game what's most of your food, right? Yeah. I want like I want that to be on the landscape. I want there to be a bun. Amounts of that and I don't I'm not bashful about the fact that my desires their influence my feelings about Predator management. Like I don't view it as that bad wolves kill coyotes. Competition. Yeah. Yeah. Let's see here pass. It says it's too close to call top 10 most shoot. Wow, so that wow man. They were I think they're predicting. That was a done deal. Holy shit. It's only now that to be clear. That is just that proposition 114 in Colorado is they're saying restore a great great was what it is.


It's making that the state fish and game agency will need to craft a plan. There's still a lot as Like it's not like that passes and also in here comes a helicopter full of wolves. It doesn't go that way. They have to craft a plan and that plan has to be approved. Yeah, it'll be it'll be like you can imagine will be like all kinds of lawsuits all kinds of issues a lot to be sussed out but it's forcing the state game agency to craft a plan and take seriously what it would look like like there because the argument is like, oh you're making it a popular vote you're taking science out of the hands of scientists. And putting it in the hands of the public but in all fairness, I hope it doesn't pass because wolves are showing up in Colorado on their own.


I think that's a better way to go. But yeah, I think it like less social tensions. It'll happen slower. It'll be like a you'll kind of like generate a sort of different sort of wolf that way so I hope it doesn't pass but what do you mean by that generate a different sort of wolf? I mean that wolves that this is a little bit it's a little bit fuzzy, but it's like when wolves when we Established wolf seasons and Monta wolf hunting seasons and trapping seasons in Montana and Wyoming and Idaho after a long period where there were in a wolf season. So I'm it had a really dramatic impact on how the Wolves behaved it made them much more secretive move them to different areas kind of pushed him out of some of the bigger riparian zones.


It just sort of change their attitude change the way they interact with the landscape so that you're getting it might be true that by having wolves that have this Instinct of they're already coming out of the greater Yellowstone ecosystem, you know passing down through fields of Southern Wyoming and going to Colorado. They might have kind of a they might have developed a finer tune Instinct about avoiding trouble with people because there's a like a lot of selective pressure against wolves and against Grizzlies a lot of selective pressure against those that are too ready to engage with man.


It's like a good way to end up dead. When you engage with man and spend too much time around livestock spent any time around developments. It's like it doesn't work out for those ones the ones that shy away from an avoid habitations avoid livestock. Like that's the that mentality in a wolf gets rewarded so it could be that if we're headed down a path where it's it's just gonna happen that Colorado is going to have wolves and I'll say Absolute is going to happen because it happened. They showed up on their own doesn't he? Do they know what the numbers are saying? What they think they're having pops. So it's the people who are the people The Architects of this plan in Colorado was H is not going to happen fast enough.


They want that real fast and do they have a specific reason why they wanted to happen faster. They they would say that that wolves are gone because of human manipulation because a very intentional plan to shoot them and poison. Them off the face of the Earth. This was in the eighteen hundreds. Yeah, 1800 1900 s and that is wrong. That's a sin against nature and that we have an obligation to rectify that crime that sin and bring this animal back there enthusiasms don't extend to all sorts of imperiled wildlife, but this is a highly to them.


Very symbolic one. It's very symbolic people, you know the black like why they don't have those passions around the black-footed ferret. I don't know how to love black-footed ferrets. They don't feel that way about black-footed ferrets, but with Wolves it's like It means a lot to him. I think also that is bringing wolves in is a little it's like also no one's ever going to tell you this. I have a suspicion that I have a personal theory that it's a kind of a way to sort of Stick it to it's kind of a way to stick it to cattle producers its kind of way to stick it to Hunters.


There's a there's a little bit of that that infuses it a little bit of a cultural Antagonism that that that that that itch isn't scratched with black-footed ferret work like it is with Wolves just symbolic. So you think they're so are they like vegetarians? They want to stick it to cattle producers because they don't want people growing cattle. Well, I mean, it does to speak in very very general terms the cattle industry has been historically quite hostile to environmental groups. No crossed all the Predators right hostile the wolves. I'm kind of like, you know, if you if you could work into my brain on it and sort of like just accept what I'm telling you is kind of a true thing.


I do like wolves to be on the landscape. I recognize that there are real problems that come like real problems for real people that come with Wolves. I don't think we should I don't think we can justifiably play God and eliminate species from the Planet like that feels very deeply wrong to me. I want wolves beyond the landscape, but if they're going to be on the landscape, we're going to have to set what that looks like and then open up like pressure release Valves and pressure release valves will take the form of hunting and trapping like State Management. There should be a stable population of wolves.


We should agree what that population looks like and they should be managed by the state as a renewable resource. It's like what I want is pretty clear. I'm not like an anti wolf person. What I am is an anti abuse of The Endangered Species Act person. So I'm not anti-predator at all, man. I enjoy seeing them. I enjoy contracts in Montana lat, you know, I got friends to see him a lot. I see only very rarely and glimpses of them, but you can go find them quite easily in certain areas like in Yellowstone National Park, you can go find them. They were people would like even before the hunting season starts. You run into a more.


How's it been O'Brien and BC first time I met Ben and we found a carcass of a moose calf that had been torn apart by Wolves. It was wild. Yeah, it was pretty recent. It was cool to see the other day. We're looking at a brand-new those phonics. We're looking at a brand new track and a big burn area a brand new track and brand new powder Stone powder snow and a big burn area. And then looking around you can feel like you can see everything in the snow is still falling those Brands like why can I see that thing then I talked to a friend of a friend and you Dad he was in that same area on the same day and had a couple passes and 40 yards of them. So, you know, it happens and it doesn't yeah, there's such a its iconic animal for the West.


You know, I'm glad they're there around I'm glad they exist. I've only seen one in the wild once that was in Alberta, and it was just it was at dusk. Barely see it run across the road because I fucking dog. What is that? It was one of those things. Yeah. I saw I saw black one this year and all the time. I saw it. I was wondering if that's what I was seeing like the whole time actually spent looking at it. I was like, is that what I'm saying? And then it was gone and I was like, oh, that's what I saw. So I never even appreciated. It was so fleeting. I never appreciated the moment. I spent the whole moment in wondering But I was looking at I had to have no idea where I was like I said, oh my God, there's a mountain lion.


I'm like, oh no, it's not it's the back of a bighorn sheep on the why my head went online. I saw a squirrel one and Alberta and I thought for a whole second that it was a wolf. Yeah. It's not a wolf to fucking squirrels like what is wrong with you? But it was just like in between trees and you know dense forest couldn't tell what the fuck I was looking at the Arctic Explorer viljami are steffensen describes sneaking up on a grizzly bear. Was a marmot and he describes seeing a walruses head. Sticking out of the water and then realizing it was a hill on the land with two white snow shoots coming down these troughs in the hillside.


It's weird how the mind plays tricks on you like that. Yeah. That's why don't you show The Walrus law knows not it's the earth when people talk about seeing Bigfoot, you know, I ran into one lady when I was doing this Bigfoot show and Mount Rainier and she was Very adamant that she saw a gorilla. She's a big gorilla walking through the woods. It's like I'm looking at it. I'm like, that's a gorilla and I remember like wow this lady so sincere wonder what you really saw, but now I'm convinced she saw black bear that was standing on two feet, but I bet in her mind. I'm thinking about me seeing that stupid squirrel. Yeah, that's Wolf People your brain plays little tricks and you and then your imagination fills in the blanks.


There are these online forms people have found three Bigfoot's on our TV show. Show because they don't realize. The people rise like ducking to get out of a shot. So someone might like whatever someone might be doing something in like realize all that, you know and a duck into a brush and lay down and people are like, oh, yeah, if you go to this moment in the second, you'll see if they don't even know it's there the guys don't even know it's there but you can see it in the bushes people love to find missing things things that aren't real. You know, I've always had this that like if Bigfoot was a hundred percent real if everybody knew there was Bigfoot, Put it wouldn't be nearly as interesting as orchids.


Like of orcas weren't real like the people of orcas were a legend like the people have seen this thing. It's in the water. It's intelligent and its enormous and they can sing and they have different languages and dialects and they might be aliens. They might be from another planet-- apparently, they don't even hurt people they help people fall off boats and they actually rescue them and these are all things that people have said about killer whales but because we know killer whales are really seem like oh, Mark you can put him in a fucking swimming pool and stick them in a parking lot in San Diego and people come to see him and they think it's cool my kids. They have a lot of we get them a lot of animal books and they like the dinosaur books especially ones where there's like a car's a picture of a dinosaur that no person relative, right?


So you get a relative size relative size since I find myself, I probably have a hundred times to my children said That's all that that Dinosaur book is great. Thanks was a great the biggest thing to ever live on the face of the earth is alive right now. The biggest thing ever is alive right now. And they're just like yeah, T-Rex man. Not some fuck. Are you listening to me? The biggest creature ever is now no, but they're like man if I could only visit the dinosaurs like a shark. Imagine if a shark wasn't real, you know, but then, you know, you can see one or at least thought a shark was extinct like everyone cares about.


Megladon. Oh my God, I think they think they might have found a Megalodon megalodons might still be alive, but nobody cares about a great white like that's that's all. For sure. There's a lot of them. Yeah, we can go. They fucking breed up in San Francisco. Go in the water. They find them there's there's a video there's an amazing video of Drone footage off of Malibu. These guys are surfing and you follow the Drone footage just a couple hundred yards from the server's you see a great white swimming through the water this right past these people. It's like Jesus Christ. I was looking at this radio tracking shit of a great white on the east coast and if you like hanging around the As you know and also like be lines for Bermuda hangs around there be lines back where it came from just like yeah, they'll go over thousand miles over this way.


Yeah, they're can credible man. Yeah, they're amazing and they're real no one gives a shit. He's a care if they see it if you see it, like whoa, but it's where animals are native and non-native. It's such a such a strange conversation. I I really enjoyed your your episode that you did with Jesse Griffiths. Where you were hunting nilgai mmm, which is a Texas where we are now as a weird place. Yeah, it's my wife's on Axis deer the other day. She's like near our house. She's like I saw this dear it was like a full sized ear, but it had spots like a fawn and I drop is an axis deer. She's like they have those here. I'm like, they must they have everything they have rear laughing driving down the road.


I go zebra could easily be a zebra. No, I'm not kidding. Zebra, zebra zebra zebra, like like like yeah. I don't know that this the one I'm talking about. I don't know. I mean I would imagine that happens is some amount of them like get away here and there but we're near us it was just wide open like like Woods in between houses access to yeah, the zebra I'm talking about was like someone zebra but it still defining like the climate. Yeah, it's it. Oh, yeah. Yeah, so these nilgai mean, you know, From India's and Antelope from you know, Indian subcontinent name an animal.


Yeah, that's strange. Look Jesse's restaurant here in Austin, man. I mean he serves it. Yeah. Shout out to die do a it's a great place, you know the night a dog on them about the name of that all the time. It's all like comes from like this. He'll have to explain it to you. But it's Italian for something. Yes like to eat from the both the Kingdom's it's something it some heat kind of regrets name is place. That but because I was like, you know know how to pronounce it but it's like eat from the kingdom of the land and Kingdom. It's some portion of this sort of like proverb he thing saying like eat from the land and from the sea is it that which isn't bad advice is he fully open now? Because when I went there leave so he just had the patio you can eat out of some kind of limited situation.


Yeah Austin's interesting like some places are just open. Yeah. It's like wear our masks come on in and then other places like his place is a little It more protective he ohm. like yourself, he's a exceedingly generous person Jesse's Good, man, we're talking all that shit about America. Good American. Yeah, it seems like a real nice guy. Like I've only met him once but as restaurants amazing, what is nilgai taste like, you know, it's kind of funny the way describing Wild game goes.


I think that that it was described to me by people who are down there. We were on a ranch go famous Ranch called Eatery has very limited access, but just through social connections and things were able to hunt on this property. That doesn't get hunted very heavily. And the people there that have grown up, you know on that property growing up in cattle ranching. They view it as they view it as Superior to beef meaning like nilgai for eatin cattle are for selling is the way some explains. Why because there's like a great monetary value just like a market for cattle. There's a market for Neo got to was different and more complicated but it was like it was like this is what we eat.


We eat the nilgai we sell the cattle me like so it's it's approachable mild reminiscent of beef. You know, it's very very popular. It is very Pop. There's a handful things in the us where we have filmed and talked about Sika deer a lot and Meryl or Delmarva Peninsula people in those areas as popular as white-tailed deer ours like America's dear America's meet people in those areas like screw that man, I mean Sika deer and with people who have exposure to access to your field. Way and people have exposure to nilgai are like that's my animal. So it's it's in that it's in that collection of yeah, they're insane man.


I got that hide tanned by got here got here in Austin ran the process for me got it at and and my daughter wanted it for her bedroom. Then there was some kind of custody battle and one of them my boys. Look at that picture that looks like something from a dr. Seuss book. That doesn't look like a real animal the one on the right the big picture. I know there's a crazy man and aren't there are vitals in a weird place to very far very far forward. So you almost low and low in forward and how far the lungs go back. Who? What do you mean the Lambs go back Lawns Oh Long zom. Sorry not as far as if you're accustomed to not as far bags of your custom to Dear.


Yeah, you actually you gotta aim like weirdly forward and weirdly low. I shot one shot top of the heart often, but I was aiming like I was under instruction from the person a guide that we were with and he was like imploring me like you have to listen to me like that. It has to go this way or you'll lose that thing in the brush. Wow. Yeah. He said when they make it into the brush, man, you get a sinking feeling they like don't go down easy. Hmm. I shot at what--he's like shoot again. Shoot again. I really I feel like I've shot it again. But yeah, they're worried about losing the strong strong animals. But yeah, man, they run most around private land. There are public hunting options opportunities form is that an animal that gets hunted by tigers in its natural environment?


I believe so I believe so but I have no I have zero expertise on that. That's the thing about Axis deer. Currently was explained to me that they they do the in their natural habitat. They do get hunted by tigers. So there's so fucking fast. They're equipped to deal with it. Have you hunted access? Yeah how fast are they fast? They're so fast, but I did I'm hunting with a bow where you really really where it really comes the haunt. You leopards pull lever leverage pray. There's nothing like, you know with American Pronghorn or what we pop early call an elope. The ridiculously fast. Yeah for anything they have to deal with and it was like they the theories they co-evolved with the American cheetah. Yeah, and now he looked like why does he need to be that he doesn't have any reason to be that fast?


Yeah. I got to get ahold of Dan Flores again. Yeah II had them on years ago to talk about his book American coyote and lost contact with him. He's still talking to him and I haven't but I feel as though if I reached out to him, he would be his. Is warm and inviting as he always is he's the right guy. He's an intellect man, very very and he was when I was in graduate school, I had to take like a out of discipline seminar something like that. And I took his I took his his history writing Western history, whatever the hell class. I took a his and he kicked my ass kicked. My ass is very hard class to take and I learned a tremendous amount from that guy.


He was a good professor. I want to get him together with someone like Randall Carlson who's an expert in the younger dryas impact Theory. Yeah, because the two of them coincide like the the mass extinction of North American mammals. Yeah coincide timeline-wise with the younger dryas impact Theory. So, you know Randall Carlson spent his entire life focusing on this impact Theory how it ended the Ice Age people talk about it being Like the idea that never dies. Yeah, I was at the lindenmayer site in Colorado of famous Folsom site Ice Age encampment and I was it was funny because I was I happened to be at that site that there's a guy there working knee certain sediment levels to find these little micro crystals these these like learning things that were created during the impact because you had all this radiocarbon dating that had been done around and lindenmayer, so we knew all these ages and he was in there looking for these things in the Anthropologist that I was with were very dismissive of him was like, ahh you know, but they're less and less so now well, yeah, well, they're very invested there like we I did an interview with a guy not too long ago.


We're talking about scientists those of entomologist Justin Schmidt. I think it was we're talking about like why do young scientists always make all the discoveries not all but you know, the good idea like some really good ideas come from Young scientist. He said because people my age all we do is defend our old shit. It seems killer so busy like the were so busy defending our old theories. Well so many people and the anthropology side want to employ the Blitzkrieg. Theory right, which is not that that this point it's dead or Undead really now we're not talking about I got an opportunity to revise my book after 10 years. Yeah. I put some language in there around the Blitzkrieg hypothesis. So what's the replacement Theory?


Let's explain the Blitzkrieg Theory? Yeah, the Blitzkrieg hypothesis held that. That it was the arrival of humans that led to the extirpation and Extinction of a lot of the Ice Age megafauna. So you'd look and it would be that why did mammoths go extinct in Europe, you know Thirty forty thousand years ago, but they went extinct here 10,000 years ago and you can map like human migrations and you found this kind of like compelling pattern of the fact that people show up and she goes extinct part. We did we did a podcast about this with a guy you should talk to Named David melts, who knows this world better than anybody and it's really elegant is a very elegant Theory it explains a lot very quickly.


It's seductive because I think it's seductive from a cultural perspective because it allows you to fantasize that past cultures were as destructive as our own which makes you feel good that they were hunting these things to Extinction back then so we can't be that bad for driving things to Extinction now everything about it was like very packaged up and had a nice bow on it. What started to eat away at the Blitzkrieg hypothesis. Is that more DNA work on Extinct and run remains like more DNA work on Bones and a greater picture of effective population size of these past populations and you realize that things were in steep decline.


Anyways, things were changing rapidly. Ways maybe people came in and kind of like did the the a coup de gras on some of these things but it wasn't that they blinked out they faded out for a long time, but everything our own perspective of how we used to look at it made everything seem very compressed and very immediate and so just it's just gotten like more complicated. It's just got more complicated as we understand more that you add the you had the the mammoth populations were perhaps collapsing long before people showed up and also there's the problem gestation period yeah, there's that was the idea to that you could like people coming into a valley and you would kill some females and could have like a for pachyderms, you know things like very low fecundity that you could come in and kill some females and have this impact on it.


There's also the problem that I remember criticism of people used to feel this way to the criticism. You see they called the Bison boys where they had this Fantasy of these like roving highly effective big game hunters and then people point now to why is there not more evidence of like why is there such limited evidence of humans killing mastodons and mammoths most I mean such as gone right right a long time ago, but that's another thing when we used to do an archaeology. They would throw everything away except for the big bones. They would look for projectile points. Look for big bones. Everything else just get washed away and sluice boxes or through sieves.


You know, when we weren't looking at the finer picture of like what people a what was there they thought that any association of human artifacts in Mammoth remains meant that well, it could only mean one thing these people killed those mammoths hmm, you know sites that are described as kill sites that now people investigating like we have no reason to believe This is a kill site. There's a thing that came out of Mexico not long ago where they like. Oh the the all this was a big kill site. They even flip the bones over in order to do this and that to me. I remember the and then he's analyst come look at like Rick there is no compelling reason to think that this is a kill site.


Because I'll now like you take a elephant but dead elephant dump it on the ground look at it in a month. Look at it a month later. Look at it a month later. Look at it a month later. What happens to the bones? You know and things that we use to think we're kill sites are just not it's a long time something dies time goes by someone goes and camps there later. It all gets jumbled up. You find a projectile point a mammoth bones. Oh my God, he killed it. And then other people are like, well, no not we've analyzed the 3000 years separated these two occurrences. There's only so much place on the planet shit happens in the same place time and time and time again. So it's just it's falling apart for four reasons. He melts would describe more eloquently than me.


It is fascinating. When they're trying to piece together what happened based on some bones and fossils and based on tools and just whatever evidence that they find in the ground and that they're trying to put together a comprehensive portrait of History through this what a lot of anthropologists laughs thought is that everything unexplained as always I'm like a religious significance. I also like let's say you find a couple Buffalo skulls in the circle like they're doing a dig and they find some Buffalo skulls facing the same way in the circle. Oh, I see what you're saying. It was like a ritual. Yeah. It's ritualistic or just gonna be like, I dare ya.


I mean, you know, I might be cutting up dear my kids come in and do something line the holes up in some way stick them in the snow right or whatever things just like freakish. But yeah, like unexplained things are always like ritualistic symbol. Like we read stuff into stuff. But yeah, the Blitzkrieg hypothesis. I'm sure there's probably some hanger-on, but it's It's As Dead As the mammoths. Hmm. I used to love it because it was so beautiful, especially because there's stuff like this like wrangel Island. That's where the woolly mammoths were survive. They lived there till three four thousand years ago and in that screen Y and then you be like, but no one ever showed up there.


They didn't get colonized by humans. Yeah, why did all this big shit go extinct in Australia 40,000 years ago. When people showed up it's you gotta have that melts or do done. What's his name David J Meltzer. He's at Southern Methodist University where I went to visit him. You know what he showed me. Is there the the Folsom type site where they first excavated fulsome bones. I got to hold them and you can see on the skull. This is no joke. This isn't like us making believe something is true. These are you know, 12 13 thousand year old wise and skulls and you can see The cut marks where they cut the tongues out.


Wow. Yeah the knife you can see the knife work on the bones. Wow. Yeah, he's that dude is that dude is he's sharp man. He's read a bunch of books about this stuff. He kind of blow your mind a little bit when we were in Nevada when we went on that mule deer hunt for your show. No, I found an arrowhead and I lost it. When what the fuck happened someone cleaned my office and it no disappeared. We're going to talk about putting. Yeah, you're supposed to supposed to leave it there put it back and I didn't I was with some Anthropologist one time and therefore we were finding sweet shit up in the Brooks range and Alaska and you had to leave Their mandate photograph and sketch it and stuff and tuck it back into the tuck it back into the I'm so crazy talk it back into the tundra.


Would you find all old stuff old stuff? These guys are like what kind of stuff projectile points big projectile points? Like how old well the guy I was with he's retired now a guy named Mike cons. He had found a thing called the Mesa site and he had identified like, you know, this is that kind of areas like Like mathematically the most remote area and North America, if you factor in distance from roads and settlements, he had found this very prominent Mesa where it wasn't a campsite was the place that people would sit and wait for game to come by and found hundreds of projectile points up there. Wow. These things are like Ice Age projectile points because I had all kinds of radiocarbon dates because they built all these fires up there.


Hmm. And so he there's a he did this whole like book The thing about it. It's the academic Community accepts it the academic consensus is that he's right during the Ice Age. Whatever was twelve seven year 12,000 some odd years ago. Whatever the hell was 10,700 like some ice age date people camped up here made shitloads of projectile points. This guy found them. We were doing it kind of a continuation of that work of mapping out campsites and We would find like unbelievable points. Unbelievable point just seems so fucked up to what has it been picked over yet.


I know but it seems so fucked up to lie. Dude, Tony man. It was like against every bit of like Michigan elbow grease I've ever had laid up in me. I would fantasize I'll be like I'd like, you know, you might be leaving that there was some day. I'm going to get me a helicopter. It will be mine. Well, just the idea. Of holding on to one of those just put it in your hand and just imagine what it was like when that guy use tendons to lace it to a stick. Yeah Bad Dudes. Yeah to get their food. A lot of know-how they didn't know they're bad. They thought they had cool stuff.


They're shown each other new shit new techniques strategies the like check this out and they're like, oh you young guys, you know, they were they thought it was sweet. Yeah. There's a lot of that. Out here. There's a lot of arrowheads apparently out here on ranches people find them all the time. Yeah, my friend Gary Clark jr. Had a picture on his Instagram page. You probably find Jamie of a perfect Arrowhead he found this Ranch. I mean, it's just perfect and you just look at that Arrowhead and you think God damn someone sent that through the lungs of a white-tailed deer probably hundreds of years ago. Look at that sweet. That's awesome. Look at that thing.


It's perfect. And it looks like someone just made it. Yeah, man time travel. I know. Can you imagine if there was any ever a time or you could just go to view just to be a fly on the wall of History. Do you know when you think you 20,000 years ago Miles City Montana? Why does because I just want to see how I'd want to see maybe not 20, whatever the hell it is. I don't want to see how woolly mammoths interacted. That landscape. Wow look at the scene woolly mammoths in that and their habitats.


They're at sort of the arrival of the first humans. This is a guy I'm friends with online. I don't know him in real world, but he's contacted me. He's actually sent me some stuff from his sight, but he's the Instagram handle is the Boneyard in Alaska. Hmm. Do you know this guy here? Let me know. Let me see if I could find it he Already, there you go. The Boneyard Alaska they have this site that they found something there once many many years ago. And since then they've been pulling all these like there's an Ice Age Caribou horn. They've been pulling all these incredible pieces out.


I mean just over and over and over it. You see that one picture at a bear track. Look at that. Right? Next is foot. That's is that a black bear? Or small grizzly bear was that I'd want to see the front foot better. But the my the front foot back behind his heel my going to looks like a Grizzly. Now, if you scroll back to the page, Jamie go down. They've had a bunch of like look at the one the upper right upper right hand corner. There's a force Gallant on the podcast talking about it. But that yeah, well they get all the tasks. They keep finding their I mean, they've had it's a treasure Trove and this one area and it's not an enormous area. I mean, I think it's only a few Acres that they've been Excavating and finding all this shit but it's just a massive amount of dead bones and skulls and tusks and this one area on my first date with my wife.


I took her to the La Brea Tar Pits girls. You know what she was getting into. Yeah, my old stomping grounds. I've never been but that's all you really know. She tells a story where they had like a little miniature bronze of a Meth and she said oh like a baby man. They must have found a baby man. If and I um, I was like, well, no, actually, you know, that's the she's like, yeah, no shit. You know, she's like well little lady, let me set you straight. That's a specific time. So you would want to see that more than anything else. Yeah, if I could do a second if I could take a second whack at it.


I would go like a second setting like Back to the Future Part II. Yeah, I would go to join Daniel Boone on his first trip over the Cumberland Gap that had to be wild having my second row didn't eat wolves. I don't know. I know he's got a great story about a wolf coming into their camp and biting a guy and what the surprise these honours was that the wolf seem very intent on one individual. Huh and bit this individual he then later developed hydrophobia. And they were out Jack lighting for deer.


They burn pine knots in the front of a boat and drift down rivers of shoot deer and he had a bout of what they called it hydrophoby. And went berserk he was he had rabies. Yeah, you had rabies. So Hydrophobia is like that pile of fear of water. Like I don't know what it is with people, you know, freak out had a bout had to be restrained. Took him home. And he died. Wow. Yeah that was in his that was in his Social Circle. So the wolf had given him rabies when it bit him and came into a camp seem variant what alarmed them was how it seems so intent on a person and eventually bit that person killed that guy geez, and then there's another thing to have the bun where Boone's on Boone's kid was tortured and killed by Indians and he was hastily buried and Boone went back to Boone went back to to find the bones of his son and though wolves had torn at the body and Bun.


It was a rainstorm bun later described how you lifted his boy out and held him, you know sobbing and then heard some sounds in the distance. It was some Indians coming and slipped off. Into the night and you think about like that moment for that guy Jesus Christ when he later in life, he would gone his long hunting trips just him and his him and his slave. together We're going like like they're like old old men old bodies or whatever. I don't mean to I don't mean to say like bodies because it was like right but they were like they were like him and a slave would go on these long Journeys honey together, which I think I'd be like a great play, right?


It kind of would be. Oh dude, when I retire I'm gonna work on that. Just imagine being those people not knowing what was out there. Getting away across the country. Mmm. That's it. Just a type of mindset. It's a rare individual that I just don't think we grow people like that anymore. No, it's over observed. It's over observed, but Lewis and Clark were supposed to keep their eyes out for mammoths. Really. Wow, it was like, oh, well, you're out there man. There was some iteration was there any stories of mammoths people they had all of the bones all the bones that come out of stuff Jefferson guy really interested in some of these mammoths and mastodons bones that have come out of some of those licks and was like, hey man, you know in addition all the other shit like keep your eyes out for big elephant.


It must have been fascinating to see what the wild life was like before. It was molested by modern humans, you know back in the In 1700 slyke dude. Read Russell would read Russell Osborn's Journal of a Trapper. What what year is that from he was in the late 30s early 40s. He was meticulous Journal keeper one of the few people that wrote a journal who wasn't full of shit. Yeah, it's a great depiction of what it was like and he was like, you know 30 years after. Contact and those areas. Oh, yeah, but I think I mentioned this to you before but like our idea of like pre-contact contact. This is Elliot West is this historian.


He describes how at the when Lewis and Clark hit the Great Plains. I'm I told you this when there's a clerk at the Great Plains there were Indians living on the Great Plains. So here's Lois Clark discovering the Great Plains. Right? Right. There were Indians on the Great Plains who had been to Europe met the king of France and returned. Yeah at that time. He's like it is he has his essays like I can't know what it's called. But it's like it's a muddled history. Hmm. It is like you want to put it you want to put it into like this neat chronology and shit. There were hundreds of years of just touching go of interaction marching go interactions hundreds, you know, we get this like linear idea about like, you know, that that all of a sudden we sorta like in this organized fashion went and found these areas, but there's like crazy.


Play I had no idea that anybody from back then from a Native American tribe had gone to France but that sounds insane. Like how did they even get over there? Remember judge Jim jarmusch's dead, man. Yes, the customer that like people would be brought like as like like, you know delegations hmm, you know, like we'd be trying to manipulate the government's France Spain England, you know would be trying to manipulate tribes to participate and form alliances. And you know that you would that though, you know will say that the the French might Ally Ally with with a group and that group would stop the bleed of English colonists pushing into the you know, Appalachians and there's all these just and it was you know, it wasn't a lot of little self-serving to like, you know, the tribes absolutely it was like they weren't capable of making decisions for themselves.


They got on board with these plans. But yeah, they were wining and dining man. Be like, you know, we're happy to join forces with you come to see my Palace. It's funny because we're in such a historic time right now, but we're in the middle of it, you know one day they're going to look back on these days post this crazy election, when people are jockeying for position who's going to be able to control they'll be like fucking podcast Joe Rogan. I'm sure it's gonna be weird. That's your order dead. Ruin it all or not. for naught But they're going to be looking back at this time that what a chaotic time it is.


I mean, this is this is a history time like when people in the future going over the 21st century and all the different turns and yeah trials and tribulations is going to be a pivotal moment. We what's this Jamie? There you go, 17:25 group of Indians including one. How do you say that? Oh and oh Sarge Jose Jose Sage at one, Missouri Chief one, Missouri. Young woman one, Illinois one Chicago. How do you say that Chicago you or Chicago? I have no idea. I don't know the pronunciation and one metric gummy ass were sent to Paris France there.


They met with the director of the company of the Indies and the Duke and the Is of De bourbon chiefs were given a complete French outfit which included a blue dress coat silver ornaments in a plumed hat trimmed in silver. They are presented to King Louis the 15th and they performed a dance at the Opera the French King gave each of the Chiefs a royal Medallion a rifle a sword and a watch. Wow, then it goes on a name more group. So that 1725 Lewis and Clark were 1804, but those weren't those were like, you know not well. Stern why is drone western books that I read I was listening to I should say on audio book about Native Americans.


Maybe it was Black Elk like elk speaks. Yeah. Well, they talked about him going over to Europe and taking part of those Wild Bill shows. They did over there that that is one of the more fascinating things about the wild west was that these people that were involved in these historical battles, then recreate a condemned it would be as though this isn't the participants in the Battle of Little Bighorn where they defeated the 7th Cavalry under Koster and annihilated as command participants pins that battle would later get together.


They would get together because you know, there's all there there was other like campaigns going to have the same time. So like we think about cultural getting killed but not too far away. It was more soldiers that didn't anyways participants that would later get together and play it out. It's hard to picture that we would have Al Qaeda Fighters rights re-enacting calm and be like, oh, yeah, I survived the global war on terror and shit. Now we're going to show you like know I was sitting here when they kicked in the door. Like like how that happened actual people from like Gettysburg would get together, right? Yeah and bring it tender.


Yeah. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah, I feel like if you went like my old man fought World War 2. I feel like I've had you gone. I don't know man, maybe when he's older in life and they said like hey, do you want to get together with some of the you know, what you like to call krauts who were in the war and you show what happened when your buddy got killed? I feel like he might be like I know know that still feels a little fresh. Yeah real fresh. Yeah, I mean in these guys were doing this not long after to they weren't even old man yet. No. Yeah, like half a decade it's so and we're talking about the level of animosity that these people would kill each other on both sides and mutilate the bodies deep deep deep hatred.


Yeah, the likes of which is hard for us to comprehend like the the impulse to to desecrate the corpse of your enemy and then get together and have a wild west show about it one of the mutilating. You recommended Son Of The Morning Star. Have you read it? Yeah. Yeah. So heavy heavy shit the things that they did to each other, you know. Yeah, and that the crazy thing was that the Native Americans had no sense of There was there was no quitting. There was no sense of turning themselves in there was no sense of like if you were captured your you are murdered and mutilated so they would fight to The Bitter End like they knew there was no surrender because if you surrendered you would be tortured and killed.


Yeah, like some of the depictions of the tortures from that and empires of the summer Moon. Yeah, the things they did to the bodies like just like Jesus Christ. Like when did they develop such insane? Royalty and is this always been a part of being a human being or was this exacerbated by the hard conditions of the of the Plains? Like what what led them to be so vicious it it's a great question, man. There's things about like things that these great the Great Lakes tribes of like making people eat parts of themselves, you know, but a lot of had, you know, there's like things about the how are you if you could handle that Um not crack it was respected.


It was like a testing, you know, but I don't know what it was like to live. I can't even begin to imagine was like to live with that level of stuff. There's a I recently read a book called planes when the Yellowstone and it was a history of the Yellowstone Basin and this guy takes that whole it's sort of like an antidote to some of the Morning Star because he takes that That cost her fight, which has become so emblematic of the West and like this is regarded as his big turning point in the history of the Indian Wars and he treats it like just like a little kind of like inconsequential thing that happened one day. Hey just didn't really matter.


The book was written man. I mean, you know, I mean it was like everyone knows how this story is going to end. And that day didn't have any bearing on how I was going to end guy did something stupid. Got some people killed the war ground down. It'd be like if we're if it's like it would be like if we're like imagining D-Day right be like let's say we're imagining D-Day and then we heard about some peripheral story that happened on D-Day were like a weird thing happen and some soldiers got killed and some guy made a mistake and got some people killed and are telling of D-Day and let's say that incident was called the whatever the baculum incident. Okay. Now when we conceptualize D-Day when we talk about Koster, it's like this isn't his analogy of I'm presenting this way when we talk about Koster were sort of talking about D-Day as the back element incident and we've lost sight of D-Day.


You know, it was like just a little blip is like a thing that happened that didn't matter the war ground on like they beat him. They knew they were going to beat him. No one wondered who was going to win right the wars like they some guy screwed up got some people killed. We subjugated the tribes and then it became bigger over his over time it became that we like that that story got infused with all this folklore importance than symbol and it's like deeply symbolic. I'm a sucker for it. I am a deeply symbolic. Yeah, just war was intimate then it was a there was no other way you had to be closed and we close to each other to kill each other.


Yeah, it's a different world. Right and with the Plains Indians even more intimate because you're just dealing with bows and arrows. Yeah Lance is on horses. It's a different kind of different kind of life and death. Yeah and flying a drone over the Middle East from Texas and then go Home at night and have dinner with your family. So it's it's interesting how we're more and more separated from that and also interesting that the the Plains Indian seemed to take Delight in it. Like it was it was fun. There was fun sport. There was ever increasing ways to be more cruel and vicious and it seemed to be there was entertainment involved in.


Yeah some kind of Honor Code that I can't even Begin to try to like guess that and explain but things that would land you in jail today for war crimes. Yeah. We're a matter of course. Yeah expected forgot to talk about your book. Oh, no, we don't need to talk about it. Like I'd love it. If you mentioned I'm very proud of his feet either guide to Wilderness skills and survival. This is your how many you guys have written you had the the two books on Wild game? Yeah, we have the guidebook. Yeah guide books, like complete guide to hunting butchering and cooking wild game volumes 1 & 2 which is big game of smog and then did a wild game book Wild game cookbook.


And this is a very pragmatic practical. It's kind of almost a response to the sort of fantasy land. That through the survival genre has become it's a lot more. There's a lot it's for people who actually spend time Outdoors avoiding avoiding trouble managing trouble conducting risk assessment. And then also just like how to think how to behave what to do what things matter what things don't what wrist live in your head. What risks are real? Yeah. It's yeah, it's comes.


Out December one is you're going to be pre-order now. Oh, I got a copy of it right here baby. Is there going to be an audio version of this? I don't know. We haven't talked about it. It's Illustrated.


Yeah, that would be a problem. Right? Yeah, and it'd be it's more meant to be like a usable manual. Yeah become usable manual bomb. I'm quite happy with thanks for bringing it up. My pleasure. Thanks for being here man. This is fun. Oh, we're much always is I'll come back in a year or two years. Whatever please sales come back anytime your podcast is the meat eater podcast. It's available everywhere and then the show is on. Netflix and sometimes it's on the sportsmen channel to right? Yeah, that's right. But how does that work? You know has these like this complex thing of like first window second window stop. So our episodes currently premiere on Netflix and then go to you know, you'd find them on Sportsman Channel Outdoor Channel past episodes, but new stuff goes up and Netflix and winds up there and we have we just recently put our seasons one and two just on YouTube. You just go check them out on YouTube. Alright, well, we'll be adding to that you. YouTube stash as well. All right. Yeah, beautiful. Thanks for being here. Thanks a lot. Bye everybody. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you to expressvpn rated number one by CNET wired The Verge and countless more go to expressvpn.com Rogan and you can get extra three months for free on a one-year package. That's expr ESS VPN.com Rogan for an extra three months free on their one-year package expressvpn. And.com / Rogan go there and learn more. We're also brought to you by policy. Genius palsy. Genius makes it easy to find life and auto insurance. If you're a homeowner head over to palsy genius.com right now to get started. They've saved their home and auto insurance customers an average of $1,000 a year by re shopping policy genius when it comes to insurance. It's nice to get it right. We're also brought to you by by the motherfucking cash app download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. And when you do download the cash app, make sure you enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word. You will receive ten dollars and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend. Justin Brands fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo and we're brought to you by to she stop wiping your butt with dry toilet paper. It's This is disgusting and you wouldn't use that to clean up any other part of your body if you had shit on it you want water and you want water from tushy because it's very economical. It starts just 79 bucks and you can get hooked up when you go to hell otoshi.com Rogan you get


ten percent off your order n free shipping today. We did a friends. Thank you for tuning to show much. Love to everybody out there, bye-bye and a big kiss.