
Oh, hello friends, welcome to the program this episode. The podcast is brought to you by woop and woop strap that I wear every single day. It's an awesome Fitness tracker that tracks your resting heart rate your heart rate variability and it tracks your sleep accurately. And that's been the most sobering for me during sober October every time I wake up I check my whoop app. It tells me how much I slept and how much I've recovered. I love it because it's like having Personal trainer that tells you how your body's doing with real data gives your recovery score in the morning lets you know, if your body is good to go or if it needs some rest you get Target exertion goals to aim for based on your recovery.


So, you know how hard your workout should be and based on how intense your day is it'll let you know how much sleep your body really needs to recover no more guesswork. It's awesome. I love it. And for just 30 bucks a month you get personalized insights. For seven that quantify all the data that whoop strap collects and helps you better understand your body on a deeper level. Whoop goes beyond just tracking calories and heart rate. It monitors your sleep you're straining your recovery and all with personalized feedback at all in real-time with in their app. It's amazing and it's a big reason why I recommend it to anybody trying to get in shape or anyone just that just wants to build better healthier habits in general and for listeners of this podcast whoop Is offering 15% off all memberships give whoop a shot.


And if it's not for you they offer you a 30 day return policy. No questions asked head over to whoop. That's wh oop.com enter Rogan Ro Gan at checkout and save 15% off the best fitness tracker known to the human race join whoop today and sleep better recover faster and train smarter. We're also brought to you by the mother fucking cash app. That's right the cash app the best fucking application for finance the world has ever known. It's the best way to send money between your friends and family without having to hold on to that dirty paper cash, but the cash have is also the best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app.


You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry as stacking SATs. SAS is short for Satoshi. Who is this legendary person who created bitcoin? No one even knows who it is whether it's a boy or a girl and who they are what their nest? No, no anything what we No, is it Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency then acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority many people think that it is the Shangri-La of currency. That is the the ultimate Utopia. Well, you can get involved you could buy Bitcoin if you want to buy Bitcoin you buy it from the cash app, but of course when you download the cash app enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word.


Third you will receive ten dollars and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend. Justin wrens fight for the Forgotten charity. So don't forget use the promo code Joe Rogan all one word. When you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. We're also brought to you by butcher box butcher box makes it easy to get high quality humanely raised meat that you can trust they deliver 100% grass-fed grass-finished beef. Free range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood directly to your door. It's an awesome company. They deliver this food to you for free anywhere in the lower 48 and the way they do it is you choose your box and your delivery frequency.


They offer five boxes for curated box options as well as the popular custom box. So you can get exactly what you and your family love for me that is grass-fed. Ed grass-finished beef and the quality of the meat is fantastic and you get an unbelievable value. The average cost is less than $6 a meal. They freeze it at the peak of freshness and vacuum seal it they ship it to you and eco-friendly 100% recyclable boxes and you get to enjoy high quality meat delivered to your door and you have more time for amazing meals together. Yay. It's just a great company. They have great ethics to give cattle room to graze a hundred four hundred.


St. Grass-fed they're free to roam in the pastor's. They raise hogs on a pasture or hoop barden's free to do what hogs do they ensure the chickens have outdoor access with no cages no crates, no crowding and they uphold strict fishing and handling practices when it comes to wild caught sustainably harvested Seafood. It's an awesome company and for a limited time new members can get a free Thanksgiving turkey when you sign up for butcher Box by going to butcher box.com / Rogan that's butcher box.com Rogan and you get a free turkey in your first order. Yay. We're also brought to you by Simply Safe Simply.


Save is an award-winning home security company that's got it dialed in every 26 seconds. There's a break in this country but was simply save home security. You can protect your home around the clock. It's serious lasting protection and all it takes is a simple 30-minute set up. Even get a free security camera. When you protect your home today more on that in a second. You'll know your home and your family are always safe with Simply Safe. You set up simply save yourself in a few minutes without any tools or wiring though technician or salesperson has to step foot in your home. Then Simply Save. We will monitor your home around the clock with Security Professionals who were there in case of an emergency to immediately send help to your home.


Plus there's no contract. No hidden fees. He's and no installation cost That's Why Us news and World Report named simply saved the best overall home security of 2020 go to visit Simply Save.com / Rogan now and get a free security camera plus a 60 day risk-free trial with any new system order. There's nothing to lose go today to Simply Save.com / Rogan. That's simply safe.com / Rogan my guest today. Is it a Raising person a frequent guest on this podcast. He is a professor in evolutionary psychology and an author of a new book that just came out it is called the parasitic mind how infectious ideas are killing Common Sense.


He is brilliant. I love them to death. Please give it up for the great and powerful God's side. The Joe Rogan Experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Hello, what's up, man? How are you? Good to see you the Godfather you to how you doing, man? I miss you man. It's been a long time. I wish we could do it in studio, but I don't think you're allowed to travel from Canada right now, right? I'm not but I'm so worried about your covid results that just like my hero Joe Biden told me I need to wear a mask. What do you think of that of marketing? I like it.


The parasitic mind mask. Excellent. Do you selling those? And we will be eventually but my publisher still working out all the final details. Yeah. All right, beautiful. Beautiful want to know how are you doing with the covid? How is the truth Seeker Jamie doing young Jamie's all good to go. He was only really sick for a day because he's young and virile and he takes his vitamin D and zinc and vitamin C and all that stuff. He caught it. We don't know where he caught it. He believes in Mighty caught it at a bar on a patio but really was only sick for a day, but you know, we had to do the right thing and so we were locked out he was locked. For 10 days and he had four positive covid results in a row. Now five.


Did you get one today negative there are negative excuse me positive in a good way negative negative in terms of him having the disease but positive in a good way. So and you've always been negative. Yeah. I've always been negative. Oh good. Yeah. Well fortunately yeah, but we're good to go now. So no issues. No one else has gotten it. It's amazing that Jamie is the first person in studio that actually tested positive we've tested Tested everyone today was my 48th test. I've been tested 48 different times. Yeah, is that the invasive one where they really go up and take all your brain, or is it a less? Finally they don't have to do that anymore. They found they just it mean it doesn't feel good.


But they just they don't go all the way up. They go kind of Midway and they just do it for 10 seconds in each nostril and then they stick it in the machine and you get a result in 15 minutes. How how how much has this whole thing affected your life? I mean other than having to do things remotely and so on it's affected. Everyone's life right doing things remotely. We have actually shockingly done not that many remotely a lot of the people we brought in and just tested everybody. It's just so much better. I mean, you know when we're face-to-face mean you and I have been friends for a long time. Now how many years have we been doing these things together? Well, I don't know maybe eight years or something. It's nice to see you and hug you and to talk.


Until you know the look each other in the eye but this is a great second. Best of the metrics changed in terms of your listeners as a function of whether you do it in person. No room. No that hasn't changed. They the numbers keep going up because people are at home and they're trapped and they look for content and they also look for honest content. There's not a lot of that shit out there headed up to the election. Everyone is so twisted and biased and it's just It's such a weird weird time. I mean, I just I wanted to be over in hopes that not just the election but also covid so the people can get back to work which I think will calm people down when the financial situation starts to improve.


I think people will be less on edge. It's just such a divided time. So it's so unfortunate, but I think you know, I think we're going to learn a lot from this and I really do. Yeah, I hope so too. I mean, it's And it's been tough over here because I'm on sabbatical this semester and it's at the time when my book came out. So I was planning on doing all kinds of, you know, World Book tours and also all sorts of stuff and everything has been shut down so it's been a bummer but at least I get to spend more time with the family. I guess. Well that yeah, there's some as long as people take advantage of this time. You can do some self improvement you can you know, people can meditate and exercise and right and there's a lot of things you can get done.


Yeah. These are minor concerns. I believe in comparison to the people whose businesses are shut down and the people who've lost family members and you know, I have struggled personally health-wise with the disease. The number of people that are losing their businesses is just insane. I mean, this is unprecedented. It's there's nothing like it and one of the reasons why we left California is because of their Draconian measures that they're using to shut things down, you know, the initial conversation they were going to shut it down until they flatten out the Curve. And the hospitals were at Camp, you know, we're able to accept people and they weren't overburdened. Well, they're not overburden now and they still have everything shut down. It doesn't make any sense and they're saying now the after the election after the elections with the keep saying so they're not even trying to hide that it's political and you know, Jamie and I and the rest of the crew we were all pretty sick of it and it just our freedoms are being impinged upon.


It just didn't it didn't infringed upon rather. It didn't seem like like the what we signed up for, you know, we never signed up for an autocrat whenever signed up for the government to be able to tell us that we can't work. This is insane. This is never happened before and it you know, it makes all the wacky tinfoil hat conspiracy theories actually seem to make more sense than they've ever made before which is even more terrifying because people already been queuing on doubt the ass online everyone so crazy already online and this is what gives them it adds more fuel to the fire that this is Real and seems to be in a lot of ways. I mean that they are they're doing this for political purposes, which is terrifying.


Yeah, you know, I analogize that to you know, if you want to raise children. Well, you need to have you know, consistent parenting so that the child knows what he or she needs to do to get The Strokes and what he or she needs to do if they're going to get punished when you have a haphazard parental style. It's a form of mine fuck if I might say for the child because they don't know when to expect your love or your scorn and in a sense. I view the current covid regulations akin to a inconsistent parent, right? I don't know if tomorrow I'm allowed to invite people over for a small barbecue at my house or not. It all seems very sort of flying by the seat of your pants.


And I think that's what stresses me the most but I can't really have any sense of regularity or any predictability in my life. I think that's the really tough part. What are the regulations in Montreal in? What you're allowed to do and not allowed to do and are they is draconians and as they are here in the United States. Well particularly in California and Texas Texas. They give you a lot more freedom. It's really nice. So right now we're on our second month of pretty complete lockdown not locked down in the sense that you can't go out on the street, but you can go to read the restaurants are closed. You could only take out the cafes are closed the gyms are closed so you could certainly walk around the city.


He freely but most of the things that you and I might do if we're going to leave our house we can do I can't go to the gym. I can't go to a cafe. I can't go to a restaurant. So in that sense, it's quite tough. I end up spending, you know, most of my time either at home or I go for long walks. Is this a national thing or is it a regional thing? I think it varies across each province because of all of the provinces for you know for much of the covid crisis Quebec and Montreal in particular were some of the hot As a matter of fact where I live was one of the hot spots within the hot spots of Montreal and so we were quite quite concerned and so we've tried to limit to the best of our abilities, you know going out but you know, especially in Montreal where as you know, you lived in Boston winter is coming.


So it was easy to kind of go through covid when it's April, you know, May and June and July it's going to be a lot more challenging to do the lockdown when it's you know - 20 and I haven't been outside. Side for three weeks. Yeah, what they tried to do in LA is really bizarre. They try to tell people you can't have people over for like a party you can't have families over for your house and they were actually asking people to turn their neighbors in yeah, which is that they were offering rewards for people who turning their neighbors in you know, in the beginning it made sense because we were worried that two million people were going to die in this was a disease that was going to ravage the entire country. But then when you look at the survival rate it does Pan out if we knew coming into if covid we had all the information that we have now at the beginning if we had all that information now and they propose the same lockdown, I think people would have resisted.


They would have been Furious. The problem is the initially agreed to it thinking that was going to be way worse than it was and then when it turned out to not be nearly as deadly as we feared there was no adjustments made I hear you and you know, I've had a few, you know virologist on my show. I think you have as well and several of them have told me that they eat early in the lockdown that they thought that there wasn't a very good cost-benefit analysis in terms of the repercussions of such of lockdown that many of the costs of the lockdown. We're not being taken into account within the modeling and I think their position has turned out to be true right very few people talk about the Mist cancer screenings and the heart disease and the anxiety and the depression and the spousal.


Views on the child abuse. And so I don't know when that auto corrective mechanism is going to work but I suspect that people are not going to tolerate this for much longer. I think well, I don't know what they can do outside of like a revolt and that's what's terrifying. You know, I agree with you though. I think the World Health Organization is the that was what we were supposed to be paying attention to and YouTube literally said that they were going to censor anything that didn't agree with the World Health Organization amazing, but now the world Of Health Organization has come out and said that the lockdowns should end there were saying that the economic despair suicides drug addiction. Everything is skyrocketed.


Right and the World Health Organization is saying that the effect of the lockdown has been so detrimental that they don't support this economic lockdown but yet the lockdown continues so now they don't support the World Health Organization anymore, which is like, okay. Well, who is the authority now? Who's the authority because Can't be the mayor of Los Angeles for the governor of California because the the they're both so rabidly Democrat this it's so they're so rapidly liberal that it seems like they would be happy to watch the economy tanked if they could blame it on Donald Trump and this is where we find ourselves. I hear you. It's by the way is is California the most democratic State at the various levels of any state.


Is that would that be true to say I wonder New York City? Democratic as well. It's the coastal cities. You know, it's something it's interesting because that maybe I could ask you this. Why do you think cities become so liberal? Because it seems like there's no real conservative cities cities almost always go Blue. I suspect that's because that's where sort of the Intelligentsia and up going. And as you know, most of the folks with that are within the Intelligentsia are typically exactly the people that I discuss in the person. And the people who are the rest of thighs by all these idea pathogens and so I suspect that, you know, if you are an up-and-coming person who lives in Binghamton New York, no disrespect to New York to Binghamton and then you want to make it you you move to New York and then you get some degree in the liberal arts college you get parasitized by these idiotic ideas and then slowly all of these urban areas become Ultra Progressive.


I can't think what would be another explanation. There's so few. Intellectuals and academics that have avoided this how have you managed to be? So steadfast you have avoided this from the beginning and I know you've been criticized but you come out of it smiling always your attitude is very admirable. It always has all because there but you're always smiling through all the nuttiness you seem to have a great disposition about this, you know, I'm well, it's a lovely question. Thank you. I think I'm in die. Out with a happy disposition so that when I wake up in the morning notwithstanding all of the possible challenges, I might face in a day.


I'm like a kid in a candy store I wake up and I'm excited. Oh my God, I'm going to speak to Joe Rogan today. I'm happy if I weren't speaking to Joe Rogan, I would be working on the next paper the next so this positionally I'm someone who's happy which I think protects me against the lunacy because even though of course I get stressed. Of course, I get beaten down my innate disposition. In is to be smiling and so in a sense, I'm lucky enough to have got done won the genetic Lottery of being someone who views the world through an optimistic lens and I think that's what allows me to fight the fights that I do because otherwise, I think I would have beaten down long time ago. I mean the only way that as you know, you could survive in this Cesspool of Academia saying the things that I say is first of all to be as you said happy and optimistic, but also to be so I think about it.


Chapter 8 of the book I talk about, you know, activating your inner honey. Badger. The honey badger is an incredibly ferocious animal as you know, Joe so he can withstand the approach of eight adult lion the honey badgers the size of you know a small dog. How could it be that lions are intimidated by the honey badger? Well because he's ferocious and so while I may have a happy disposition as you know, if you've seen me in some of my battles and social media, I'm also an intellectual honey badger if you come after me, you better come, correct cause Cuz I'm gonna come after you I'm gonna come after your ancestors. I'm going to come after you're dead ancestors. And so I think you know the tenacity coupled with the optimistic Outlook is kind of the right cocktail of traits to have to be able to fight the lunacy.


You're also a person who embraced early on alternative media in terms of your ability to spread your word YouTube podcast all these different things you recognize that there is a real benefit in particular long. Forum conversations where you are able to express yourself unchecked uncensored and really get your full idea out there. So people can understand like you're not some bizarre reactionary who's not making any sense. You're a man who has studied this your whole life and you've thought through this very deeply and written about it. You know, it's very accurately exactly and I think I might have mentioned this story before to you on the show, but it's worth repeating.


It's actually a story that I discuss in the book. It relates to you. So, you know, when I went to Stanford Business School several years ago to give a talk, you know as you might imagine it's a very, you know, highfalutin elitist environment the the host who took me out that evening prior to my talk tonight before my thought said, oh, you know, I hear you're going on Joe Rogan I said, yeah. Yeah, you know, we're friends, you know love to go on Joe. It's such a great Forum to spread ideas and he was very haughty right he's well you Stanford, we don't support, you know doing research so that you could appear on Joe Rogan. I said, well, what do you mean? You don't think it's a good idea to appear on a platform that allows you to spread your ideas to 10 million people instead of writing a paper that will be read by you your mom to reviewers and an editor.


Well, I guess you didn't like that response. But the reality is that that's the kind of elitism that you see in Academia where I mean, I'm happy to see that a growing number of academics are coming on a platform like yours because it is insane to not take advantage of such platforms. Look I am in the currency of creating knowledge and then spreading knowledge. Well, I could appear on Joe Rogan's podcast for five minutes and have greater impact than if I publish ten papers in the most elite scientific journals. So so yes, I embrace those forums because pragmatically it's a wonderful way to have fantastic conversations, right it is and it's beautiful that brave academics are being rewarded the people that are willing to go on my podcast and other podcasts.


You know that, you know might get looked down upon by these Scholars, you know, they get rewarded by enormous audiences and also curious people that you know, maybe have full-time jobs maybe didn't go to college but are curious folks that want to explore these ideas and explore them being described by a person such as yourself who has deeply studied them Joe. Do you know how many and I know you know this already I don't have to tell you how incredible your platform is. I Be walking on a beach and Bahamas and that that literally happened by the way. We're a local Bahamian will come up to me and say oh my God, aren't you didn't you appear on Joe Rogan?


So I mean and I don't say this to talk about Fame but to demonstrate the kind of platform you've created where I could be in a bathroom and some little town and someone's going to recognize me because I appeared on the show and I say this not because of the recognition factor or the fame but Again, if I am in the business of discussing ideas, I should use every possible tool whether it be your podcast or if I create my own podcast any way that I can spread ideas. I'm going to jump on it. I think a lot of academics don't do it because of an ego defensive reason which is they know that they may not be able to pull it off appearing on Joe Rogan and therefore they denigrate those who can write because they've mastered one form of communication, which is you know, the The rigid academic paper that they can do well, and that's great.


I mean we are professors. We should be publishing academic papers, but why not try to tip your toes on you know, so that the public can get excited about your ideas. Right? Well, I've had a lot of academics on the show and I applaud them. I'm happy that they're willing to do that. But I do understand that the environment of Academia it it's kind of a thought bubble right? Like they're all they're all. Echoing sort of the same ideas and reinforcing those ideas within each other and you know, but in their defense this is how it's been forever. I mean social media and alternative media like podcasts and YouTube we're talking a decade or two.


It's not that much time in this podcast is 11 years old. That's nothing but doesn't it suck that? Akademi. I always analogize academics to Navy Seals right? When we choose Navy Seals. We're picking people who hopefully have a flat. Says them have great courage bravery. So shouldn't we be picking similar traits and our intellectuals, but we're not right. So we don't create intellectual seals who are willing to go and Uncharted intellectual Terror territories rather we create, you know tepid. Yeah sheepish academics who stay in their Lanes who never rock the boat and as you and I know the world is shaped by people who are unorthodox, right?


Whether it be Sigmund Freud telling us about the unconscious mind or Charles Darwin developing his theory of Select, you know natural selection or Galileo or Socrates. The world is shaped by those who weren't fed fence sitters, right? You became who you are with your podcast because you decided to step out of the bubble and create something that no one else has created before at three our intimate conversation with Incredible guests. So I always tell people You can play it safe. But no one will remember you if you take risks. The great rewards will befall you. Well. Honestly the risks they're not that great. That's what's crazy.


Like the especially this podcast were warning me is hilarious because I never intended to do this in the first place. This is all just an accident. I started this podcast smoking pot and talking to my friends on a laptop and it became like slowly but surely a place where I could get guests and then explore things that I'm Rested in and I don't even remember how you and I first got in contact with each other. I know we have in common your nephew. Well Ariel helwani who is a am a journalist for ESPN and I've known Ariel for years. But other than that, how did we even get in contact with each other? I think it was through Twitter.


Maybe I was communicating with Arielle or vice versa. We got onto a threat together and that's how we first connected. And you said hey come on my show and so on and of course, I was very excited. To come that's I think how it started. It was through some you know connection through our yeah, I don't remember the details, but look where we are now man what we have 21 25 hours of content between the two of us. Yeah. And when was the last time you were on how long ago was it? I think it was December 2018. So almost two years. Well the podcast is probably five times six times bigger than are you getting me. Oh, yeah. Are you able to share any metrics just so you can make me super envious hundreds of millions of downloads. a month That is insane.


Yeah, it's insane. The weird thing is that when we went over to Spotify it actually got bigger like the the numbers on YouTube and iTunes didn't shrink they just we just picked up new listeners. It's very bizarre. I expected that the numbers would drop on iTunes because we have this new platform. But since we're on both platforms now, what happened is we just gained new people on Spotify that really May respond defy loyalists that you know, just it always been accustomed to it and they said let me check it. And then the numbers on Spotify just keep growing and growing so it's real weird. How do you happy when you wake up in the morning? Can you can you believe that? You've become this cultural icon that sort of moderate Saul these unbelievable conversations with all sorts of incredible people.


I mean, isn't it incredible? It's incredible in that. It's not credible. It doesn't make anything mom. Come on it. Yeah. I'm yeah, I'm always modest right? But but I'm also honest this is not And I'm not really because I'm not qualified. That's probably why I'm qualified because it works because I don't have the barriers. Like I don't have the I don't have the sense to say. Well this is probably not a good person to have on for my career or like this is not a wise topic of discussion is going to I'm going to get a lot of criticism for this because I don't think that way that's probably why it's worked but I'm going to tell you two things if I make number one, I think it's your intellectual.


Yah City, and that's one thing that I always tell my graduate students what they're looking to do their doctoral dissertations and so on you could be the hardest working person and the brightest person if you don't have that intellectual curiosity right sort of waking up every day excited about things that you're going to learn that they then you're not going to be a good scholar let alone a great host on a podcast like yours and I also think it's exactly what you said is your honesty, right? There's that comes through on the camera that there is no He s coming from you and I love the fact by the way that you said that you don't modulate who you bring on so and let me let me share my own personal experience. I was just contacted a few days ago and if she's listening now, I'm sorry if I haven't responded yet.


I will I was contacted by very famous former pornstar. I won't mention her name. I didn't actually know her work but I have since gone and done my research on her and and if my wife is listening it was Completely for research purposes and so anyways, so so I she reached out to me said hey, would you come on my show? You know, I'm a fan now if I were the typical academic I would be doing all sorts of machination Xin my head and calculations. Well, is it good for my brand to be speaking to a porn star? Doesn't it? Make me look less professorial and actually I never even entered my mind.


I saw that she had a sufficiently large platform that she was certainly an intelligent. Owen and I'm very likely to reply with her and say hey let's let's do it. So and I think that comes across with you. There's no pretense. Let's just sit down and have conversations with interesting people. Of course in my case. My show is infinitely smaller than yours, but it's been a successful within my Sphere for I think similar reasons to why yours has been so successful. The porn star thing is very interesting because people avoid even the topic of porn but yet clearly a lot of people are watching it and a good example, and I don't mean Other guy into the bus is the journalist for the New Yorker who unfortunately was on a zoom call recently and thought he had muted his video and did not and why was why was it work on the zoom called aside and start masturbating and didn't know the definitely definitely do but I wasn't going to say his name.


I just want to say to you said his name and not me. I guess I feel terrible for the man because first of all because I masturbate I know that's going to sound crazy. But I do and I know there are many men who masturbate you're married. So of course you masturbate. Well I even before I was married I masturbated I'm going to be honest with you. I am a lifelong masturbator. I think I discovered it in my teenage years and I've been an avid pursuer of it ever since I think it's a Clarity device, but it's also I mean in terms of like when you get horny, you get very confused like men who are horny have one thing on their mind and it's it's a good tool to eliminate.


That one thing from your mind and you could look you don't want to be fixated by something. If you're hungry. You should eat, you know, you don't want to be just like starving all day. Just eat it. I'm sorry, that's good. But my point is we all sort of want to pretend that we're not doing that. It's very straight like intellectually. We all know that we do it. We everyone knows we do it. Everyone. Does it pretty much everyone does it but when you discuss it people like They roll their eyes they pull their head. It's not a shame. It's a very strange thing that we have biological needs and if you don't attend to these biological needs you I believe that you can have very confusing motives and people that are excessively horny.


They're distracted. It's not healthy to Seinfeld references that speak exactly to that point you're ready. So the first one is actually one that I discussed in my first book my 2007 Devolution basis of consumption where I was talking about how you can analyze cultural products including you know, sitcom themes via an evolutionary lens. And so I take the example of the classic episode from Seinfeld master of my domain right where well that's just a euphemism for who could withstand their masturbatory urges the longest and then I say, well, let's Analyze That plotline of that particular show from a An evolutionary perspective and so the first thing you might remember is that there are three male characters and one female one.


They all recognize that she has to put in more money into the into the pot that has the best body because it isn't as difficult for women to resist their Master masturbatory urges. So that was the first point then as each one was losing the bet meaning they were succumbing to their masturbatory urges. It's interesting to look at what was the trigger that causes? To lose the bad. So in the case of Kramer, it's because he is seeing a gorgeous young woman scantily-clad doing all sorts of sexy positions as she's exercising. So what triggered him to masturbate was the visual imagery, whereas when it came to Elaine losing the bet it's because she fantasized about becoming the long-term partner the wife of John F Kennedy jr.


Rights, if she wasn't she wasn't isn't she wasn't masturbating over the Cabana Boy Who is 18 years old with a nice ass and so that spoke to the differences in terms of the content of the fantasies of men and women and then the second point I want to make that is also from Seinfeld is there is an episode where George decides to forego sex and by freeing his mind from having to focus on sex. He starts learning a whole bunch of new languages and he Of in chemistry equation problems because he 99 percent of his brain is no longer focused on you know sex and so there you go.


Yeah, that's that's a real issue with people but again discussing porn or especially having a conversation with someone who participates in the the actual production and acting in passe acting with air quotes. It's it's forbidden, it's Taboo. It's you you get looked down upon for some very bizarre reason that probably has to do with our puritanical shame the F. I'm not sure if we've discussed this before but even if we have I think it's worth repeating as probably many years ago that we discussed it. So in in one of my other books, I talked about the, you know, evolutionary explanation of pornography and I specifically talk about porn that is directed at heterosexual males.


So typically you might think that because men are interested in Sleeping with many women that pornography is going to have one man sleeping with multiple women in a particular scene, right and that's called polygyny one man. Many women. Whereas actually the study has been done scientific study. It turns out that there's a lot more what's called polyandrous depictions in porn polyandry is one woman with multiple men. So why is it that porn directed to heterosexual men has a a lot more scenes with one woman having sex with multiple men and their it turns out that the explanation comes from something called sperm competition hypothesis the idea being that men and actually males and many species get a rise literally and seeing other men having sex.


So for example, when you are trying to get a stud, let's say a horse or a dog to mate with a female you often will make him watch another male. Being sex and that will get the rise out of him. And so there's some really interesting scientific Ways by which you could study a product like pornography which of course is one of the most, you know, the products that we spend the most money on. That's so bizarre the so the sperm hypothesis Theory there was a wasn't there. It was in a book or a paper on sperm Wars that was later discredited. Yes. Yeah, so that's why I tried to get that guy on my show. His name is Robin, baby. Baker it's you're exactly right.


That's a book that came out in the 90s called sperm Wars and at the time he had retired and so he replied to me very graciously and said look, I'd love to come on your show. But you know, I'm out of the whole thing. So thanks, but no, thanks now. So let me just mention what his theory was and then what people have said since so he argued in his book and in several studies that he had published that when men ejaculate they actually have three types of sperm Within Jacqueline there is a traditional sperm that you could think of sort of the fertilizer right the traditional the head with the tail that's looking for the egg to fertilize but then he argued that there are also blockers.


So these are kind of malformed spermatozoa that actually don't look for the for an egg, but rather Place themselves at the entrance of the reproductive tract of a woman so that it gets stopped at the incoming new sperm from other men, and then there are killers sperms that Don't look for the egg to fertilize but look for other men's sperm to kill now if that theory is correct, and and you're exactly right that there's been contentious points about whether it is as accurate as we said or not. And I think the jury is still a bit out. If the theory is correct this basically argues that women evolutionarily speaking would have been extraordinarily promiscuous because sperm within a woman's track is only viable for about 72.


Hours so that if men have evolved the chemical Weaponry to block other men's sperm and kill other men's firm. That means that evolutionarily speaking women would have been very likely to have mated with at least two guys with in a 72-year 72-hour period now when I mentioned this theory in front of a crowd the feminist will come up to me and say thank you. Dr. Sad what a great, you know lecture because that theory supports the idea that women could be just as as salacious and their sexuality as men and that supports the feminist argument if I propose an equally if not, even more sound evolutionary theory that doesn't support the feminist narrative Boo.


The doctor said, you're a Nazi boo-boo. So it shows you right so it shows you what happens when you use ideology to judge the veracity of a theory if it occurs with my narrative, you're a great scientist if it doesn't occur, You're a Nazi and anyone that knows your past if you've described your past and your history on my podcast the idea of calling you a Nazi becomes incredibly offensive and ridiculous, isn't it? Fantastic and it's happened many many times. But but most famously was the time when and I know you've become very good friends with the Jordan Pederson Jordan and I had been invited in 2017 to speak at Ryerson University, which is a university.


Varsity in Toronto, and the the title of the talk was the stifling of free speech on University campuses and guess what happened to that speech it got cancelled because you're not see no, no well because you know where these controversial gas and the people who are the agitators who canceled us put out Facebook Flyers where they said, you know, neo-nazis and white Lists are not welcome in Toronto. And so when I wrote and said well, but I'm Lebanese Jew that didn't alter I was still a Neo-Nazi and so it shows you what happens when people are completely parasitized by political tribalism.


It's insane. Not just a Lebanese to a Lebanese Jew who feared for his life and fled Lebanon because your Jew isn't that amazing. It's disgusting. It's just such a stupid way to discredit someone's ideas instead of instead of having conversation. This is one of the weirdest things about our current climate is that instead of engaging with people on these ideas and discussing them they look to discredit and they looked at this credit but these disingenuous labels and it's very unfortunate and it's an anti intellectual approach all it's unbelievable because you know, why because it's a so, there's something in Psychology called a fast and Frugal Yuri I think so.


Right. So most of us when we're making a decision don't necessarily sit at way the all the pros and cons of you know, a multi attribute choice that we're making rather. We want to use some simplifying decision rule to arrive at a choice well to label your debate opponent one of these names in a sense is a ugly manifestation of a fast and Frugal you ristic right? Because it takes very little cognitive effort for me to deploy it right. I don't have to really engage The merits of your point, you're a Nazi shut up we're done. And as you said, I mean it is the height of anti-intellectualism. And by the way, it's not just you know, the typical social media blue haired person.


Who does it even academics engage in this form of anti-intellectualism and that's what upsets me the most that they should know better and yet they succumb to the same kind of faster fascist strategies. Well, there's a spectrum of intellectuals as well. Right and some of them are simple minded in many ways. I mean, although they're intelligent and although the well-read and their Scholars they still they hate to use the word but they're lazy they don't they don't want to engage in this intellectual gladiatorial combat about their ideas. And that's what it is. So certainly that and I would also say that Academia has regrettably created if you like the reward mechanisms for hyper specialization, right?


So when you're thinking Thinking about becoming an academic a scientist. You really can sort of follow one of two strategies. You can become a unbelievable expert and a very very narrow area because that creates economies of scale right? I don't have to continuously go back and check the literature because I really know everything there is to know about this very very small area of expertise or you could be a polymath. You could be a broad thinker and regrettably much of Academia promotes the former rather than the latter now if you look at My own scientific career. I haven't done the things that I should be doing according to the rules of the academic game because if I were trying to maximize, you know, according to the rules I should only be publishing in journals that are within my narrow area of expertise evolutionary psychology consumer psychology psychology of decision-making, but if you go and look at my CV I've published in medicine and economics and site and psychiatric issues and her behavior and evolutionary theory and bibliometrics.


I don't care where I publish if you have a problem that I think I could contribute to sign me up and that kind of speaks to what we talked about earlier when we were talking about willingness to speak to all sorts of people. It's an openness of spirit of mine. I'm willing to go to any intellectual landscape as long as it triggers my interest. I don't play by the rules. I like to be free. Well, it's it's part of being a curious human being isn't it? And it is the fact that we should not be encouraged. I mean, it seems like when a person is intelligent as yourself chooses to take your your mind and apply it to other different disciplines and different ideas.


That should be rewarded. I've been told the exact opposite. I've been told by colleagues that they were looking at hiring me at some other university, but then when they looked at my CV and saw that I had published and all these different areas. That it looked like I wasn't focused I was scattered. I didn't hear it. So and I'll give you a wonderful example of the the strategy of non not being scattered. So when I was a doctoral student at Cornell, one of the famous psychologist, you know within my department was a lady who has since passed away Professor Alice Eisen, and she was a great noted psychologist, but her entire career was about effect.


The front affect right your feelings, right? So she studied how those affect affect variety speaking. How does affect affect word completion. So it was basically affect and fill in the blank. So for 40 50 years, that's all she did. So if you talked about if you talk to her about affect, she certainly was the queen of the hill, but if you talk to her about anything outside of affect, she was probably a babbling imbecile and I apologize for saying that they should rest. In peace, she wouldn't be able to get on the Joe Rogan show unless you talk to her for three hours about affect to me. She may be a great Professor, but she's not an intellectual and intellectual is one who can go to different intellectual Landscapes and engage in great conversations.


And regrettably. There are very few public intellectuals today go have that capacity, but someone like Christopher Hitchens whom I think you know, have you ever met Christopher Hitchens know unfortunately, he died before I could meet him. I'm a huge fan of his work. This is the kind of guy that you want to be hanging out with at a party. And by the way, he wasn't a professor. He wasn't a professional professional intellectual but he was a true intellectual in the old style of European intellectuals. You could sit down with him and talk about art or literature or science. He was well read about everything and innocence again not to blow the proverbial smoke up your behind. I think that's what you do.


Yes, you may not have the fancy degrees, but you come with Intellectual curiosity so that you could speak to Sir Roger Penrose one day and to a comedian whose every second word is f-this and f-that and you could pull it off with both. That's the secret of your success. Well, I had a conversation with Eric Weinstein about that once and he was like, imagine what it would be like for someone who didn't know what your podcast was about and they tuned in and saw Roger Penrose on one day and then Joey Diaz on the next day they like what the fuck is this show, you know, but But this show if it anything represents what I'm interested in and I'm interested in a lot of things the I think the term intellectual is such a grandiose and ridiculous term for someone who's a cage fighting commentator and a stand-up comedian, but I'm I am curious and I'm very fortunate that I do have friendships with people like yourself and you know and Sam Harris and Jordan Pederson and and and I could get a guy like Roger Penrose dude to sit down and talk to me and and many other brilliant people that I've had the pleasure.


Talking to are you aware that he won the Nobel Prize. What and what? Oh my God, Roger Penrose Roger. Yeah. I thought you meant Jordan Peterson was like what y'all Jordan because you can't really win it. Jordan Pederson does right now. I am aware that Roger Penrose want it is amazing. I mean isn't that mean that is I think the last time that I appeared on your show and someone maybe Jamie can check it either. He was the guest before me or after So based on Tan predictive models. I should be booking a flight to Stockholm to receive my own. I don't know if it works that way but maybe it should yeah, he was one of those guys where I'm sitting down and as I was talking to him, I'm like what the fuck am I doing here?


How is this who talk this guy in the doing this and I have to you know, do my best to not mess this up now does that is does it strengthen when you and I are speaking, of course we can get very academic and so on. We can also joke because we're friends and you know, we're both funny and so on does it intimidate you when you speak to someone like sir Roger because you don't have sort of that camera Audrey outlet that otherwise you might have with other intellectuals with whom you are personal friends with I don't think it intimidates me as much as it can finds me, but I was so curious to hear his thoughts on things. It was fortunate that I had a lot of questions for him and I really did want to dive into His intellect and try to find out you know, what how he thinks about these things and and what he's what he's studying and what his thoughts were so it was it was very fortunate that I had a deep curiosity about the subject.


So it was it was but it was certainly intimidating, you know, right? It's you know, are they are they any guests that you've yet to have that would be sort of here are my top three. I know you recently have Kanye. As what are some people that you think sort of our are you know, you must have them before this whole ride ends none zero. I don't have that thought. Yeah. I mean he really even yeah even Kanye. I mean, I guess it's probably says I kind of avoided talking to him for a long time because I was worried it was gonna be not good for him because I'm such a fan of his as an artist. I think he's a brilliant musician, but I also think that because of his I mean he's been diagnosed.


As being bipolar, man, whatever you want to say, whatever mental issues. He's had I think they contribute in some ways to his art because he's so prolific his mind is going in a million different directions all at once and someone who is like that but very different of course is Elon Musk. His mind is going in a million different directions all at the same time as well and his his ability to focus on so many. Different subjects simultaneously is stunning. Kanye is the same way but in a different realm, right his focus is on design and on wrap and on now religion.


I mean, he's become very religious and and even politics but he's very misunderstood. Kanye is a very misunderstood person and I think that he doesn't do himself any service by calling himself a genius and all the But all the that all the trucks similar to Trump, right? He's kind of you know, he Pat's himself on the back and pump himself up and talks about his accomplishments and his financial success and all those different it for whatever reason those put some people off. They don't put me off but they did they do put some people off but I understand why he does it. I understand that. He's he's kind of looking to affirm that he's on the right path. Like he like these are markers of success, but he could point to like you can say he's an idiot.


You could say all these But hey, look at all. He's accomplished. Look at what he's done. And if you listen to his music, I mean he's brilliant. There's no doubt about he's brilliant. He's insanely prolific and his stuff is great. He has never put out a Bad album. They're all great. And he's married to an Armenian with woman as is your good friend got sad. So that's the commonality that we both share. Well, there you go. I'm a big fan of Armenians in general. I really am. Yeah. Why is that? Well, there's been a lot of great Fighters that were Armenian greatest kick boxer of all time. One of the greatest guitarists of all time is Giorgio petrosyan who is in Armenian who lives in Italy whose I'm a giant fan of his and you know, there's just been many many fighters in the UFC that have been Armenian and I just I'm a fan And of they Embrace masculinity in even though it's the term toxic masculinity.


So bandied about today in Armenian culture masculinity is is praised and did just there just openly masculine. You know, I like it. I like them. Yeah, you know, I receive many many. I don't, you know, maybe hundreds of emails from women who will sort of lament the fact that They no longer can meet a man who exhibits that kind of masculinity right? Because what's happened now as of obviously, you know is men are so confused. Right? Am I supposed to pursue a woman or will I be accused of approach rape if I give her a compliment? Will that be considered complementary bright because all these words are now a served right?


It's not just complement rape is a real word. No. No, I just made that up Jesus. He's scared me. I thought we've got so far. But by the way, you know, I had to do a one of those mandatory sex education tests at the start of last year at University all professors all students. Everybody has to take it and one of the questions I don't remember the exact words was you know, if you see a guy, you know cat calling a woman on campus. Is that a form of sexual violence or something to that effect and You know, I knew what was the the answer going through his eye and I answered no and then it's kind of prompts you and it's like no it is a form of sexual violence and then they kind of explained it to me as if I were a three-year-old child who hasn't yet mastered the Dynamics of being social amongst human beings.


And so so while I might have been satirical about the complement rate we have gotten to the stage now where it is mandatory for University participants, whether they be faculty members or staff. Students to take these mandatory sexual, you know training manuals. It's insane. I kind of understand why they want people to think differently about harassment. I get that. I mean, I would hate to be alert. I've been hit on by gay men and you know, it's it's odd it's complimentary but when they get it, but I've been hit on only a couple times in my life but a few times where it was aggressive and I was like what's different is is first of all the man who was doing one particular guy who's doing it.


There was the most aggressive that I remember was not physically dangerous to me. Like I could have killed him if I wanted to right so I was like listen man stopped, but it wasn't it wasn't I wasn't what the roles were reversed. But like if it was Mike Tyson who is doing that to me, I would feel terrified because if he wanted to beat me up and and have his way with me not a lot. Do you know this I will kind of be written and it's also called prison. Yeah, so I don't have the understanding that a woman would have on a woman is being approached by a man is a very real concern that she could be raped.


This is I don't have that same concern unless someone's drugged me or done something if the man is weaker physically than me. I don't have that concern, but I tried to look at it from a woman's perspective and I get how cat calling. Ting if you're a woman particularly, there's a large group of men and they say things to you that's terrifying it could be terrifying I could understand but it's not violence that the problem with the word violence is you start using that word with others like silence is violence. No, it's not violence is violence silence silence is not violence. You can't bastardize these words. You cannot distort the meaning of these words because as soon as you do you're forcing people to comply with your reset.


Language you're changing definitions. You can't do that. You can say it's very disrespectful. It's rude and it's intimidating to cap call a woman. I would agree to that and I would say I've never done it. I'm not a type of person who a girl walks by my hey baby. That's not I'm you know, I've not I've never been raised that way. I've never I don't I don't do it. I'd have never done it. I don't appreciate it, but it's not violence. It's just gross. It's intimidating. Ting it's harassment. And if I was a woman I would fucking hate it but we need clear definitions. We need to I mean words are noises that we make that convey intent when you say that it's sexual violence to cat call your fucking with language and you're fucking with it in order to reinforce because everyone knows violence is bad, right every note.


Everyone knows violence is evil. Everyone knows violence should not be tolerated in a polite Society. So You you attach an extreme definition extreme word that doesn't apply but you force it into a situation what year you're fucking with they'll our definition of the way people behave and think and you're doing it to sort of force compliance into your ideology and what you what you feel the way people should act and behave as I've got a psychological mechanism that I explained in the parasitic mind about. How you redefined realities so that you can get the victimology narrative that you want and I call it the homeostasis of victimology.


And so let me explain what homeostasis is. So if you think about your thermostat in your room, it is a homeostatic machine because what it basically says is okay. I'm going to set the temperature at 70 and it's going to sample the air if it's too hot it will release the air conditioning if it's too warm. Yeah vice versa, right? So our bodies are made of many homeostatic static systems, right? If I'm hungry in my blood sugar goes below a set point. I have approached Behavior to food, right so many of our physiological systems are homeostatic many of our psychological systems are homeostatic. And so I argue that this ever never-ending redefinition of words and and context to make it seem as though they are rape or violence or sajin, e is what I call the homeostasis of victimology, which is what basically there is a set point that we need so that we can always argue that our society is evil and sexist and racist and so on if the reality is that you can't identify that sexism and racism you simply read the fine words redefine Concepts so that you could get your set point you follow what I need so and and there's a similar Seth that's called concept Creep from an Australian psychologist that are used along the same lines, right?


And it's exactly the Reason by the way. Why someone like Jesse Smollett will engage in you know full victimology because he is basically saying look I need to reach a set level of victimology so I can have the right currency to ascend the Apex of victimology and if I don't have that narrative then I will manufacture it and hence the Homeostasis of victimology well in his case is Extreme, right? Because he literally it's fraudulent. I mean literally created a fake attack and but this is you know, we we know that and I hate the narrative like no one would ever fake an attack or no one would ever lie about being harassed or attacked or even raped.


Of course, they would people lie about everything like the idea that human beings would never lie about something you that is such a gross generalization. Shouldn't there's there's a reason why there's a word called LIE. There's a reason why the concept because people engage in it and because we can't read minds and since we can't read minds people can deceive and whenever we're allowing people to willingly distort language. We're in some ways at least encouraging a form of deception. Exactly, right and I mean isn't it incredible how the onus unbelieving changes as a function of the political affiliation of the supposed victim, right?


So when wench I can't remember her name blasi Ford came up, you know the night before his Kavanaugh's confirmation or whatever to say that 36 years ago. It may have happened somewhere and I'm not sure where the I don't know if it happened. I don't have any details. Well, hashtag believe all women. When a woman came up for against Joe Biden with apparently more evidence now, I don't know the veracity of each of their accusations, but it was certainly the case that the the accuser of Joe Biden had as convincing evidence. If not more than the former case, but now it was no longer hashtag believe all women, right? And so it demonstrates to you how ugly these hashtag fast and Frugal strategies are rather than sticking to First principles, which is people are presumed to be innocent unless there is overwhelming amount of evidence.


We either fry someone or not as a function of political expediency. It's grotesque. It is grotesque and I'm glad there's someone like you out there that describes these things in a very clear way and explains the mechanisms behind them, but does it frustrate you that we are moving seems like even further in this direction as a society and do you see a way out of this? I think the way out of it is and I'm not sure that what I'm about to say is easy to implement because we are tribal animals. So I'm putting my glasses because I start schedule fuzzy. I'm getting I'm getting older. Look.


I always tell people belong to the tribe of Truth rather than to specific political tribes. Now, what do I mean by that? If you come to me and ask me, you know, it's hard to pin you God. Are you are you conservative? Are you libertarian? You liberal and I will usually answer. Well, it's hard to pin myself because I am an issues guy. So if it comes to the death penalty, I might give you a position that you might think I'm conservative or when it comes to immigration. You might think I'm conservative when it comes to social issues gay rights transgender rights. I'm about as socially liberal as they come so I don't belong to a group. I'm not conservative. I'm not liberal. I am a one idea at a time guy.


Why because I use first principles and my ability to engage in critical thinking to espouse a position on any topic that you wish to discuss with me, but I don't think that that's the natural state of most people most people are I am a republican I am, you know, whatever Democrat and therefore I must hold the line on issues 1 through 37. And so what I implore people to do is don't be that like that even though it's a natural reflex to want to belong to team blue or Inbred belong to team truth if you can achieve that possibility. Yeah and the United States at least. I'm not really that familiar with your political system in Canada, but in the United States, it's reinforced because we really only have two parties and so much so that Brett Weinstein created this thing Unity 2020 where he's trying to bring together conservatives and liberals together and and find some common ground and he was promoting this as a Alternative to the two-party system and they were banned from Twitter ban.


I know from better Twitter ban. They banned his personal Facebook page and then tried to say that it was an error, but it was not was a conscious decision what you know, there are people that work for these social media companies that have since left and now talk about it. Openly that they did have the freedom to edit things. They did have the freedom to delete things they did have and that they sort of took pleasure in doing so and that You were sort of given this leeway. If you felt like something was ideologically opposed to the terms and services of whatever social media organization you're working for.


You were allowed to make that distinction. It's very subjective. You have to say. Well this is this is negative. This is negative towards our election. This is this is promoting something that's going to damage the Democratic party. So we're just going to ban the Twitter account. Out for violating terms of services. It's never been clear as to what still bam the Twitter account still banned and they just do this based on their own personal political beliefs. It's not about it's not about truth. It's not about the freedom of expression like this. You should be free to express the idea that the two-party system has major flaws and one of the flaws is human beings natural inclination towards tribalism.


We're very aware of that and if you find support Within, Your tribe and you have steadfastly steadfastly adhere to these these ideals that the left has or the right has you'll be rewarded. Like you're part of us Yay. Good job CAD or good job Joe like you are you have adopted our conglomeration of opinions and you have stuck to them and they're so predictable on both sides right on the left. You're supposed to be pro-choice and the right you supposed to be pro-second Amendment and the you know, we have a series of these different things that you have to adhere to if you're on either side of that line and people take comfort in knowing that there's other people on their tribe that also think that way and they find some some commonality in that and they find this this camaraderie in their knowledge that this person that they're talking to has also agreed to stay within the these lines.


Oh and they'd look II quick story that recently happened to me regarding all this. Social media platforms I posted on all my social media platforms including on LinkedIn a post where I basically said, hey, you know, Joe Biden might have been a parasitic nothing for the past forty seven years, but just wait next year when in the 48th year, he's really gonna you know, solve diabetes and cure cancer. It was a satirical thing where I was kind of arguing that you know, he hasn't done much throughout his public life LinkedIn removed it because it Violated their Community standards of harassment and bullying.


Well who were right harassing and bullying right? I mean, I was harassing and bullying a public figure who's running to become the president of the United States, but that was bullying to him. That's the world we live in so I think guys like I don't know if you know these guys and you might want to consider if they're willing to come on your show to have them on guys like Senator Josh Holly senator. Content and Ted Cruz have been trying to you know, reform the the legal, you know, taking these social media from being, you know, I'm you know, so that you don't get the protection anymore. They're actual Publishers, right?


I see that they don't get the protection of hey, you can't sue us if we do stuff. But of course most of the Republicans and Democrats never want to go after the social media platforms because the ability of all of these top players to fund the Politicians whether they are on the right or left side of the aisle is so great that most people turn a blind eye but I really can't see this being something that can be tenable in the future because just like Bret Weinstein was kicked out. Look at the New York post's account was removed. Right isn't it shut down because they were running the Joe Biden story but was locked out and Jack Dorsey has since stated that they have amended their policy and it's the New York Post wants to post again they can and then they can post.


Zach seem story what they have to do. However is they have to go back to their original post remove it that will reinstate them and then they can repost the exact same story and then they'll have no issues with that whatsoever and he said that in the conversation that he had with Ted Cruz it's very confusing. I think that might just have to do with the way their social media platform is structured Jack Dorsey though, I can speak from knowing him on a personal level. He is a man. That believes in free speech and I think that inside the company he's fighting a battle, but he is personally a person that believes that Twitter should be opened and that it should be it should be an open platform and he believes in free speech.


I don't think that idea is I don't think it's embraced by the vast majority of the people that make decisions over at Twitter and I think that his ideas probably unpopular but He agrees with the sentiment the original sentiment of the internet these this the ability to distribute information for all people. He thinks that all these people that have been D platformed should have a place and that the internet should be treated like a utility and that it should be available to everyone he believes that I know he does but I think it's very difficult. When your CEO something that is a publicly traded company an enormous company. That's arguably one of the three or four Or biggest platforms for disseminating information on the planet Earth and was never intended to be that they didn't see it coming.


I mean, I'm obviously sound like a Twitter apologist. But I really like Jack Dorsey as a person and I think he's he's a very honest and he's a very interesting human being I think he gets unfairly maligned but in my conversations with him, I think he really does believe he's actually promote proposed that there be two Twitter's a Twitter. That is that there is some moderation and a Twitter that's a wild west. Oh, wow. Yeah, I actually have had them on my show also and just like you. I mean, I got the feeling that he's a real genuine, you know genuine person really cares about the world, but I think you're exactly right that there are so many different constituencies that are pulling him in different directions that even though you know, he may be fully supportive of the freedom of speech that you and I would be would be behind.


He's kind of Behold Him to certain different camps. And so I agree with you. I think that there will be eventually regulatory mechanism that kind of sets all of these social platforms straight or do you think forevermore we're going to be beholden to their BS? I think it's the only way out of this I think and someone has to step in and they have to impose First Amendment some protections on free speech on the internet right now the internet these social media platforms. Are there thought of as private companies? So they can make their own decision. You know, like maybe if you had a you know a party over at your house and someone came over your house and they started saying a bunch of really offensive things.


You kick them out of your house, but that's your own house. It's private house. But when your house is the world and you you get to decide what's offensive and what's not in other people disagree the problem is but you're you're stifling free speech and you're stifling the ability for people to make up their own mind as to what is Isn't offencive. What's correct. And what is incorrect and you know, it's been said a million times. I've said it a million times, but the answer to bad speech is not censorship. It's better speech. It's more accurate speak. It's like you have to win the Battle of ideas and much like a lot of these intellectuals that you were talking about that want to silence alternative perspectives on campus.


You see the same thing on social media people that have these ideological Has where they've they've steadfast adhered to this left-wing agenda. They don't want to engage with anyone that has a disparaging opinion or a differing opinion. They don't want to they just want to kick those people off D platform them deep platform them and they yell it out because it's been effective with people in the past. They've gotten rid of people like Milo they've gotten rid of Gavin McInnes and Alex Jones and a lot of these people that they've they've cancelled their voice, but but I think by doing so they've done themselves. A disservice whether they recognize it or not. They've done this course. It is sort of a disservice.


They've done Free Speech a disservice and they've created this tyranny of information where they have decided that they're the ones who get to decide what gets disseminated and what doesn't is very dangerous. Yeah, you know 10 years ago. I think it was in 2010. So I started I have a column on psychology today where I publish these, you know short psychology articles. On all sorts of interesting topics. I haven't been writing for them as often these days. But when I started in 2008, I was a very heavy contributor and at the time probably the most popular blogger at Psychology today was a evolutionary psychologist by the name of Satoshi.


Kanazawa who is a professor at the London School of economics in England, and he was a very sort of bombastic guy very politically irreverent used language. That was perhaps at times, you know, and I'm advisable And he had published an article where he was talking about research not his research. He was describing someone else's research where they had done a study looking at differences and how you know, women across different races were perceived in terms of their beauty and their results have not come out in a way that was politically correct if you follow what I mean, and now the way that he had handled that particular topic seemed maybe a bit bombastic.


E it wasn't the right words, but right away there was a huge call to get rid of him from Psychology today which happened but they also wanted to get him fired from his tenure position and I had written an article and I think I was the only one who had written a public article where you could still go find that on my column where I said, you know purging a blogger sets a dangerous precedent if Satoshi kanazawa is words are wrong. What better punishment is there than to keep his words. There because the Lights Of The Sun Will forevermore condemn him, right? What's the point of getting rid of him? But of course people didn't listen to my warnings and now it's become common ground to get rid of anybody.


With whom we disagree. Yeah, I go back to if you ever seen the the the documentary where what is this name the concern William F Buckley Yes, and was the other gentleman he was. Thank you. My best memory sucks today Gore Vidal and William F Buckley did a series of national debates on prime-time television in the 1960s. There were fascinated fascinating to watch these two guys go back and forth and debate ideas and two guys who really didn't like each other and hate each other, but for the United States to be able to tune into television just regular television and watch these open debates of liberal and conservative ideas.


I Is very rewarding for people I think and we don't do that. Now. We don't have that anymore. We don't have these open discussions where an intellectual in the left like Gore Vidal and intellectual on the right like William F Buckley can engage in this sort of intellectual combat and we could see who Rises and whose whose ideas resonate with with more people and I think it was around that time where Thomas Soul was. Backing down what we have today was call social. Justice Warriors. Wait when we were all in diapers, right? I mean, I think if you go back to the 60s and 70s some of the interventions that Thomas Soul had on many of the issues that were still debating And discussing today.


He was doing that in the 60s and 70s when we were in diapers, right? I mean this isn't God by the way, I don't know if you've ever reached out to try to get him on your show. This is someone that I think you'd want to have on your love to have them on. Yeah, I would love to have money person, but unfortunately that's not really possible. But right now but yeah Thomas Souls the guy who's quoted regularly on Twitter and often times by people that you know, you would think of me. It's what he's done essentially is had this entire career of doing this like well ahead of the curve like he's little and started out as Life as a liberal and yeah and sort of along the way reformed his opinions and change them and became more pragmatic and yeah, I'd like to see honest discussion.


Ends with a guy like Thomas soul and someone who disagrees with them and I guess the do it on Primetime now would actually be a waste. You know, really we want to do it on a form like this. We want to do it on the internet where you think do you think they would ever be a context where some of the powers that be will kind of wake up to the power of your platform and try to replicate it and mainstream Media, or do you think it's simply to corrosive? To actually allow to people who have different positions to share the same pot. You know the same stage. I think the only way to do something like this is to have a very small amount of people involved and when you do something on mainstream media just by definition you're going to have an enormous group of people you're going to have investors you going to have network network network Executives you going to have producers you're going to have writers you're going to have all sorts of people that many of them a vast majority have a very liberal and left-wing ideology and to have the ability to have on whoever you wanted.


You really need a singular person a singular voice like a singular mind who is curious about a bunch of different issues who's not easily influenced by people on the outside and their criticisms and their their intimidation like people are intimidated. Dated by attacks and criticism and insults and so they'll change the way they participate the way they communicate and the what they put out based on that intimidation. The only way I'm sorry, that's what happens. By the way when they are presidential debate where the moderators are typically less than ideal in terms of their expressed bias.


And that's why I was very excited and I think I have even shared when the rumor was coming out that you know, you'd be Willing to moderate a debate between Biden and Trump. I thought God damn that's a great idea what whatever happened with that did that either of their camps reach out to you or did you connect with them? What happened with that whole story Trump was all in he was all in and he wanted to do it. Yeah, he tweeted it. I mean he wanted to do it. He contacted people that contacted me to do it. I never reached out to the Biden people. I felt like if they wanted to do it they would reach out to me and if they did I would have done it, but I just don't think that's A good form for him. I mean I was as we've seen the debates themselves specifically the last debate was not good for him, but would have what I would have done is like when he was saying that I've never said I was going to ban fracking.


Jamie would have just pulled up video of him saying I'm going to ban fracking and that would have been horrible for him. It would been much better in terms of getting some clarity on what is actually said and what is actually done and you know, and then the other things about saying that his son never received any money from Russia and that's that's up. That's a lie. It's been disproven and hasn't been disproven. He knows it hasn't been disproven. But he knows that he can say that on the air and no one's going to call him on I would have stopped the moderation. I would have stopped this thing where I go sir. We're going to pull up these articles and I want you to tell me what about these articles is in factual. Like what is what's a lie? And are you sure that so would you be willing to say this in court?


Which would you be willing to risk perjury would you say this in front of a judge? If you because you could be in real trouble if you did that, but you could just lie in a debate and the moderators don't check you no one says anything about it. No one Google's it but can't they just pull up the story pull up a video. There's I mean the frakking thing is particularly egregious. Yeah. Well, there's only one Jamie he's right here. We're not giving them up but someone could have done that and it would have been much better for the American public to just stop everybody in their tracks. And also like why do they have two minutes to answer that? So antiquated? Dad this is so ridiculous the idea that you're talking about something that literally going to affect the Free World the decision of who gets control of the United States of America who what party is in control and that you're going to put some arbitrary two minute time limit on these discussions is crazy.


It's so ridiculous. And also the format is confined by these time blocks that they have this 90-minute time, but you should have a 90-minute Time block. You should start it at like agreed upon. X 60 Minute are at 6 p.m. Or whatever whatever you want to do and then work it out like Abraham Lincoln is some of the speeches that he gave when he was running for president. They were hours and hours long and he was talking without a microphone and you know, like a Town Square And discussing these ideas that he had and they would last forever and that's how you find out what a person thinks and believes you have to end. But now with the tools that we have available the fact that they don't use those tools during a presidential debate fact check.


Trump when he lies about something pull it up show that he's not telling the truth show what he actually said show the actually did as opposed to what he said. He's doing call him out on it call Biden out on let's get to the bottom of this but you know, even though those tools are available mainstream media would have to give away control. They give away control of their ability to navigate and steer this narrative, right the narrative that they're trying to steer but you know the bias that they're trying to exert On our election process is really fensive. It should be offensive to people it should be offensive that they have the ability to Google whether or not Joe Biden really did say he would never ban fracking and they didn't why would you not pull up a video that's readily available online and say sir.


We're going to pause here for a moment. We're going to play this video and tell me what you meant. When you said you were going to ban fracking tell me what you meant. When you said you were going to embrace the green New Deal tell me. What you said when you when you said that you were going to do whatever the whatever the fuck you lied about and pull it up. I think for me what amazes me about when he says things like that and and I suspect maybe we can say the same thing about Trump. Although I can't remember quite the same types of Lies Trump usually lies about you know, my penis is the biggest the women have told me. I'm the greatest lover ever. Look at the number of people. He's it's bombastic boasting right and you were right and the other guy is Basically saying things that are demonstrably false and the only thing I can think of that could explain sort of the chutzpa of engaging in these types of Lies.


It's as if Joe Biden's Brain still exists in the 1940s where he doesn't know that there is this thing called Google and computers where we can quickly have Jamie fat check you write because what the right sort of the same way that he does the Corn Pop story which which is difficult. Built to to know if he's telling the truth or not because again, it happened in the 60s or 70s or whatever. He could say something thinking that it can't be falsified because how else could you logically explain that he would engage in such lies, right? Well, not only that like, how was the Democratic party not saying? Hey, this is a mistake like and and the whole idea that there's a deadline to this process and all has to be done a certain amount of time.


And this is how we have to do it. It's like boy So weird, it's so weird such an important decision. All right, so I'm just checking my neck from where I'm sitting. Sorry about that. Do you are you willing today to make a prediction? I'm not asking you to tell me who you're voting for. But are you willing to make a prediction in terms of who you think is going to win? I do not know who's going to win and my concern my concern is is not going to matter in terms of a sense of Peace in the United States. My concern is that if Trump wins people going to be furious and if Joe Biden wins, I'm going to be furious and that I think so. I think there's a symmetry I think that if Trump wins the the lunacy will be much greater than if Biden wins.


I think if Biden wins, of course people are going to be disappointed and upset but the manner by which that disappointment will manifest itself in my view won't be as drastic as if Trump wins. I think if Trump wins, I'm going to be hiding under my desk for Evermore. Yeah, I don't know. Maybe you're correct. I hope you're not. You know, I really wish that people, you know, one of the things that Trump said that was really kind of interesting during the debates or was it? No, was it during the 60 Minutes interview? Which was I don't know if you saw that but what really want that was that ran on 60 Minutes not the one that he really did you see both. Yes, you should see the one that he released because the one that he released it's like this woman was so antagonistic the way she Feed him it's not the way to interview anyone and it's definitely not the way to interview.


Someone is going to be the president United States. I understand that he he overpowers conversations. I understand that he does that but I also think that this is also a function of the fact the only have 35 minutes to talk to this guy and so he can he could just filibuster he can just keep going he can just talk over you he could ramble he can say things that aren't true he can he could rant and Rave and do the things that he does when he does it. Campaign rallies it's not that's not the ideal way to get to him to really find out what he's really all about. The ideal way would be like this sit down in the hot cast and have him here for four hours and have him sit down and talk and then stopped him when he says things and stop him and go but hold the okay understand sir, sir.


Let's let's check that. Let me show and tell me tell me why you said that when you know, like when he says the biggest attendance. Ever for his inauguration and then you go and see this big open field and then you compare it to Obama's inauguration whatever it's packed so many more people like clearly. There's more people in this photo like why is that is this propaganda? Did someone Photoshop it or you exaggerating because you kind of exaggerated, you know, and I know this part of his personality like to make fun and exaggerated. He's an Entertainer first, right? He's a businessman first but became an Entertainer and knows really well how to say Outrageous in and then oftentimes re printable and and make they make Clips out of these things.


They become Sensational and that's also how he got elected in the first place the mainstream media thought that what they were doing was exposing what an asshole he was what they didn't realize they're giving him Free Press there were constantly talking about it. I mean, it was really a brilliant strategy. He would say outrageous things. They would take those outrageous things put them on TV people would laugh and they would go Oh, I like him and the mainstream media is like know what have you that this strategy didn't work it backfired. Do you feel as though a lot of the media? It's as if the humor module and their brain is completely lacking because I watch when Trump does his trolling and again people always wrongly presumed that whenever I take some position.


It is a manifestation of the fact that you know, I must have Says of trump in my bedroom which my wife and I use as foreplay Aid which of course is not the case at all. I'm just coming as a impartial guy from Canada. I don't have a dog in the fight and I'm always telling people wait a second aren't you being a bit too tribal? And so that's really the extent of when I engage the topic and so I will objectively listen to something that Trump said and I will crack up laughing because I actually think it's funny and yet so for example when he says You know, you know, I guess when I finished my fourth term running, of course because he's trolling right because so they go crazy.


He's a dictator he's gonna end. So how do you explain the fact that a adult with a functioning brain who's called? The journalist is unable to recognize that when he says in my fourth term he is just joking what explains that disconnect in your view? Well, I don't think that they can ignore it because I think that they have been Program to catch people saying outrageous things and expose those things. So when he says outrageous things on purpose, they can't help themselves and they happen and then people go but you know, he's just joking and they don't they don't they see that juicy carrot and they just run towards it and they don't realize it's on a stick and they're like, where's the give me that fucking carrot and they can't get the carrot.


It's very strange, but it's also he's playing on their strategy, which is Always been to catch people saying things that are unfortunate but he says unfortunate things on purpose. And so it's it's so confusing to them. He's hacked there there little system. See my feeling is that if you sat down with Trump, you could have a fun time with him, but it will always be on his terms. He loves to be the funniest guy in the room the coolest guy the guy with the biggest dick and so as long as you grant him that space, Could actually be a fun guy to have dinner with whereas again from from by some distance when I look at someone like Barack Obama.


I don't get the feeling that I would like this guy. He strikes me as haughty arrogant. And again, I'm basing it simply on the fact that I see how they act from a distance. What's your view? Do you get a similar sort of personal feeling about these guys know I don't I have a completely different opinion on Barack Obama. I think you'd be a great guy to talk to I'm a Big fan of his as a human being I like the way he communicates. I think in terms of a representative of the United States, you can never find a better person. Yes. Well educated extremely eloquent. He's he's calm no matter what he's always reserved the way he communicates is smooth and I feel like yeah, that's exactly what Trump is not.


Yes a Statesman a perfect Statesman probably the best one we've ever had and I think that he is one benefit of a guy like that is That we look at someone who's a president as a representative of the best aspect of the United States. When you look at a guy who came from a single mother came from poverty and Rose to become a lawyer a senator and then ultimately the president United States you see him and you go. Wow, that is that's that's an admirable person like it to be that that was my son. I'd be immensely proud the way he speaks the way he carries himself now if you want to get into policies if you To get into some of the things that they've done it's not as impressive.


If you as you would have hoped when he was running for president particularly in the defense of whistleblowers, like they're their take on whistleblowers in the Press has some of the worst that any Administration has ever had so but you also could say I don't know how much the president actually has control of that how much power they really have. I I tend to believe that our view of the president. Is grossly distorted in terms of their they're real they're real amount of influence over policy and decision-making particularly in terms of national security measures whistleblowers things along those lines. I think the intelligence Community has far more power than we believe and I think once a person gets into not just the intelligence Community special interest groups lobbyists, you know, the money and the power that got them into that position leaves them.


So ultimately compromised that they get into office and then they The task at hand and also, I think then they're probably briefed on the real problems internationally the real problem security-wise in the world the real problems with the that we have with our national security issues. I think it's probably terrifying and I think they probably have to amend all the ideas that they have these idealistic Notions that they had when they were running for office and then they have to sort of regather and and just have a new approach Obama's positions on a lot of things that he had when he was running for president like Of all how did he never legalize marijuana? Howdy howdy never federally legalize.


Marijuana guy who smoked it a guy this photos of him smoking it. Like why would you want to keep people locked away when you know that the United States is incarcerated so many people of color for decades and decades for a plant that makes them happy. Like how was it possible that you got out of office and didn't do that your entire time. I don't understand how is it possible that you didn't exonerate a lot of the people that were in Jail for nonviolent drug offenses. How did you not reform our definitions of like what is what's legal? And what's not legal? You know, what is schedule 1 what is scheduled to what is scheduled for you? How did you not change the laws in terms of like what people can be locked in a cage for and when you sing States like Colorado then ultimately California and all these other states becoming states that where it was legal in the state.


Why is it not Eagle federally we all understand that it's it's safer than any people could say well, why do you worry about marijuana? Because it's a personal freedom issue and this is and it's not it's not real like the the dangers the the reasoning for keeping it illegal. They're not real. They don't work. We know it's propaganda. We know it's bullshit and we know it especially when you look at the revenue that's been generated by these states like Colorado and California and Washington and Oregon all these states that have made it legal you realize it would be great of great. These places and now there was an article recently about Texas doing it. It would be of great benefit financially amazed people are still buying it.


They're just not the United States is not getting the taxes from it. And it's foolish you can only you can only say that the there's got to be some other motivation and that motivation is probably the people that run pharmaceutical companies and all these other special interests that don't want it to be legal because it would fuck with their bottom line. And it would interfere with their the money that they have coming in. And so that's very disappointing to me. Very disappointing that Obama didn't do that. Yeah, and I hear you and I guess from that perspective. You would like to fight the Jordan Jordan. Justin Trudeau did legalized. Yes. I'd like to know although I did notice that your views on your boyfriend.


Justin Trudeau has changed greatly from the first time when I told you that he is a schmuck you now believe he's a smart but you The think he was a pretty boy level of League. I write beautiful man. It's beautiful very, yes, but I want to come back for a second to so I as a psychologist who studied psychology decision making of course, I'm interested in how people make decisions. And in this case consequential decisions in terms of who's going to be president back in 2003. I had published a paper looking at the decision rules that people use when choosing presidents and perhaps to your this. Spay or perhaps you already, you know, you're already have the intuition that this is happening people don't use heavily cognitive justifications in choosing their presidents.


They use these very emotional driven fast and Frugal you ristic sand making decisions. So for example, when you and I were both speaking about trust about Obama that you know, he's Majestic and he hasn't mellifluous voice and he speaks with the Cadence of a southern baptist Minister and he's presidential. All those things might be true, but it's exactly what I think I mentioned once on your show. I'm going to take this to be akin to the cork of a wine bottle. There's an expression in Arabic that says getting drunk by simply smelling the cork of the wine bottle. Right? You don't actually need to drink the whole wine before you get drunk. All you need to do is smell the Cork and you're already drunk and I think this is exactly what happens to people they look at Trump.


They get drunk by the cork bottle which basically says As what he's vulgar, he's Brazen. He's aggressive. He's grotesque. They don't listen to his policies and similarly say would with Obama and I wish people would spend more time actually as you correctly pointed engaging the policy. So I'll give you an example. I could have a colleague who hails against critical race Theory and how Dreadful it is and then when Trump bands critical race Theory as a, you know, something to be taught to federal employees. He simply can't give him the Kudos because you know, bro, he's so disgusting. That's what I'm angry about that people lose their ability to objectively look at at people's policies rather than at The Superficial clues of a looks Majestic or he looks like a vulgar ogre.


You see what I mean? I do I do and in that sense, he does himself a disservice in a lot of ways. Well a lot of people that hope that once he got into office he would become presidential like he would shift Left, you know that was that was a hope and that it absolutely didn't happen. And you know, when people catch him saying things that aren't true and he argues with them about it. It's just like then you're feeding the fire. But also you have to realize he's he's made enemies with so many groups particularly groups of power that have been in place in the United States forever. Like the intelligence community's he's the enemy of a lot of the intelligence Community particularly the FBI. I mean they Shown that they were actively trying to get rid of them.


And then there was a lot of the people in the intelligence community that decided that he was going to be someone that they attacked and that's just crazy. We talked about it yesterday with Glenn Greenwald where he discussed how Chuck Schumer had openly said that it's so foolish for Trump to attack the intelligence community's and become an enemy of the intelligence community and that's going to prove to be foolish and as a threat That like the the intelligence communities were going to go after him and they obviously have that. Yeah did that seems to me to it's it's fascinating to see it. It's fascinating to see these mechanisms being put into place and these stories like the you know, the steel dossier where he's got Russian hookers peeing on them and all that jazz like the fact that that was printed and that they talked about that on CNN and was printed in major newspapers as you know, a possible true story.


All that is the so bizarre to say it's so bizarre to see his personality flaws Amplified and weaponized and did not concentrate on just the policies. But in many ways he's done that to himself. Yeah, he's you know, do you know who Victor Davis Hanson has? No, I don't he say he's a classicist who is a fellow at the Hoover institution at Stanford who has written a book. I'm promoting his book now rather than my own but which is A book about you know why you should have voted for Trump and so on and he and because he is a classicist who has studied, you know Greek mythology. He analogizes Trump to the classic example of Sophocles of the tragic hero, right?


You know, you get the feeling that Trump simply wants someone because maybe because he is narcissistic. He wants someone to say good job. Here's where it well and and the fact that he could never get the mainstream media to Even remotely be minimally fair, you know, if you ban critical race Theory or if you support, you know, you know absolute Free Speech, you should be congratulated for that irrespective of your political stripe, but yet because they simply could never give them any kudos for anything. Then his bombastic sort of bragging gets Amplified because he is the tragic hero saying look, what do I need to do to get you to just tap me?


The back one's and I think that Victor Davis Hanson, 's and analyzer analogizing with the Croc classic tragic Greek hero is exactly spot-on for Trump, but it is unfortunate that he has this desire to get them to Pat him on the back because yeah, there's never going to get it. Is that what I think it is garage. By the way, you mentioned Glenn Greenwald, you know in the past I sort of always thought of him as kind of, you know, Lefty Progressive, you know, don't pay attention to him, but I've seen him several times. Appear on Tucker Carlson, which is of course a show that you shouldn't appear on because it's Fox News and so on and I've always found it to be incredibly fair. So my esteem of I have to apologize to him here on the record that I thought of him in the past as sort of this really annoying kind of progressive guy, but I actually find him to be incredibly Fair minded in the way that he handles these types of issues.


I mean, do you agree with that? I couldn't agree more and I think that's one of the reasons why I decided to go on Tucker Carlson the first place Is expose his way of thinking to a lot of people that may have had these predetermined ideas of him this Prejudice ideas of him, you know, it's funny because he actually had the same opinion to me, you know, like what when we did a podcast yesterday was like I saw you before I I thought he was some guy who platform too many of these alt right assholes and he hates trans people and he goes and then I started listening to your show is like, oh he's not he's not that at all and you know, it's easy to do it. It's easy to have this sort of reductionist perspective of someone and decide. Oh that guy.


He's a wacky leftist Progressive just ridiculous ideas. But Glenn Greenwald is an honest man, and he's a man of principles and he's courageous and that's why he released the Snowden papers and that's why he's done a lot of very important work in Brazil and he's hated for it by some groups and loved by others and that's you know, he's taking a lot of chances and I find him to be incredibly intellectually honest. And he's also willing to discuss some real landmine issues real real hot button topics, you know, and we got it. We got into some of them yesterday and I respect him very much. I mean, he strikes me as the journalist that we had 20 30 years ago that the real truth Seeker who?


Yeah, of course, we all come with our political preferences. But once you put on the hat of the journalist, you're supposed to keep those at the door, and he really strikes me as a journalist of a Gan era and so kudos to him hats off. Yeah. I respect him a lot. I think there's there are generalists like him Matt Taibbi. There's quite a few of them out there that are sticking their neck out and you know, they take a lot of attacks because of that but we need more of them. We need more people that are going this world is going mad. And we have to we have to look at things accurately. We have to look at things for what they really are rather than what you want them to be or rather than the description that you say. Well, you know Oh, you're going to get love for your from your tribe because you've you know draw on the correct Line in the Sand yeah, I gotta can I switch topics is completely sure.


So I wanted to ask you something and I hope it's not an appropriate for me to bring it up. So you recently obtained a you know, huge deal with Spotify, of course putting you in a whole new category in terms of wealth has that reality altered your felt level of happiness and let me explain why I say Because I received countless emails from people who say similar things to you of similar things to what you told said of the start of our show today where you said, you know, you're always seem so happy and positive and all this kind of stuff and I always try to give them an answer in terms of you know, what are some Pathways to happiness and maybe I'll write my next book on this topic and I always tell people that you know, don't rely really on month.


I mean money in a sense. It's an inverted you up to a certain point having more money makes you You happier, but beyond that point it's diminishing returns. There's an inflection point where it doesn't really alter your level of happiness in any way would that be correct of you in that the fact that you've got this huge deal doesn't really alter your you know, Global holistic level of Happiness. No doesn't make me any happier. No, I'm happy when I could do stand-up and I can't really do stand up right now. I'm happy when I could do podcasts and very fortunate I could do that. I'm happy. My family's healthy. I'm happy. I have good friends those. Is are still there. Those are the things that make me happy. I'm happy to be able to talk to someone like you I'm happy to be able to express myself.


You know, I'm not a guy who needs a lot of money for stuff. I don't I don't live the most extravagant life, you know, I dress like a bum. I just haven't really changed much about that kind of stuff. I think that if anything it brings more pressure because once people realize you're making a lot of money and they put you in a different category, and then they start criticizing you Umm, or whether it's because of jealousy or because they realize you know, you're more viable Target, you know resonates with people more especially during this climate where so many people are losing their jobs. So many people are losing their businesses to see someone make a lot of money. It's like fuck that guy fucking and then you find more reasons to say fuck that guy and even distort that person's opinions and perspectives because if it fits your narrative and it helps you criticize them easier.


No, it definitely hasn't but So I didn't trust I think it's good to be in with a company that has an interest in your show being successful instead of just being on a platform where they benefit from you but they don't really have a vested interest in you the communications that I had with the head Spotify and the people that made this deal they want the show to be successful. They have an interest in it being successful financial interest in it being successful. And also the head of Spotify was a fan he likes listening to it. He didn't want to didn't want it to change and we've gotten insurance that it wasn't going to change and you know, a lot of people are really concerned.


Like now you're going to have a different kind of a show and now I'm just going to do the exact same show. There's been zero input in terms of like someone telling me. Hey don't talk like that. Don't say this don't bring these subject has been none of that as much as people speculate their hands has been none of it, but it doesn't doesn't make you happier, you know. You're happy when you don't have to worry when you have to worry about your bills. That's when money makes you the happiest. That's that's the big leap because I remember when I was when I first got my first development deal and I went from being really poor and not not having any idea how I was going to pay my rent to having a lot of money in the bank having like six figures in the bank and then this huge weight lifted off my shoulders.


I remember that feeling I remember the feeling like once I looked at my bank account like who like I don't have to worry about my bills like the first time in my life there you on the increasing part of the curve, right you were in other words more money led to Greater happiness. Yes, but then you get to a point where there's diminishing return whether you have 10 million or 30 million or a hundred million does absolutely not doesn't add 1 millimeter of Happiness to your Global light know it doesn't but what could it can do is add more pressure and that can actually make you less happy and then you also like I said, you're the I'll get more criticism that can make you less happy if you pay attention to it, but what I've done is ramped up my physical exercise my meditation and my as in California, at least my yoga, I haven't really been pursuing that out here.


But I've been doing a lot of exercise and as long as I have physical struggle, like like a tremendous amount of physical struggle. I I'm really good at letting the rest of it just wash off my back because I give myself so much. Much physical struggle like my workouts are so intense that whatever the pain or the frustration of the difficulty of criticism or was it pales in comparison to what I do to myself. So right and it sounds like a crazy persons approach to things but I really got a method to my madness the terms of the way my mind works.


You know, I work out like I'm training for something like I've some insanely difficult physical. Ask ahead of me that I have to prepare my body for but I really do that that task is maintaining sanity that to I have a lot of work my body has a lot of requirements and because I am in this high pressure. So too stressful situation with this weird this place that I find myself in where there's a skeleton crew of people me and Jamie mostly that reach millions of people. But all over the world like how did this ever happen and like if I just sat around and thought about all those people listening and all the people that are mad at me and all the people that love me and the expectations and the criticisms.


I'd lose my fucking mind. I really would and if I got into it and I start engaging with those people and arguing with those people all day. I would have no time for my family. I've no time for anything. So I consult with myself I think about it myself. I spend time meditating. I do deep breathing exercises in the sauna and I work. Like a fucking terrorist and then at the end of the day, I'm okay and I can keep doing that. Do you ever have you know, the the sort of the noisy brain where you're trying to sleep but you're thinking about 33,000 things because I'm thinking of someone like you who you know has multiple careers so that the stressors could become it's not as though you're only a podcast host or only a you know, an MMA God.


So is there a particular area where it's difficult to say? Shut off your brain because you're uniquely worried about those particular stressors. The the biggest stressor are my own failings. The biggest stressor of my are my own errors in the things that I've done wrong. Those are the things that bother me when I've had a show where I wasn't at my best or I said something that wasn't accurate or I said it in a way where I could have done a better job of expressing myself. Those those are the things that bother me. I am what my biggest self-critic you know, it's so funny you say this because I'm going to relate what you just said to something that is drives my behavior.


So when people tell me why do you take on all these fights, you know to the fight against these bad ideas and had so much stress to your life. I always tell them that I have and it's going to speak exactly to what you said about yourself. I have a very exacting code of personal conduct so that I am truly my you know, my most severe critic because I set the bar very high so that at the end of Of the night when I put my head on the pillow in order for me to not suffer from insomnia and to not feel like a fraud. I need to know that I've done whatever I could to contribute to the Battle of ideas now, however big or however small I don't have Joe Rogan's influence, but I certainly have some influence and so for me to be able to go to bed with my whole personhood intact, I need to feel as though I've done all that I can and that's what compels me to engage.


In the way that I do and so I really do appreciate what you said about sort of having this introspection where you're not it could be exhausting right? Because you become your worst critic that I say the perfect thing that I say. The right thing was I at my been but in a sense maybe it's best for you to be your own critic rather than others to be your critics, right? Yeah. I always tell people I'm not a fan of my work. I'm the like if anybody has criticisms believe me. I have worse criticisms, but I think that's a great regulatory mechanism and some people say, oh I should take time to smell the roses. I do outside of my work. I do I love friendships and I love life and I love my family and I love I love a lot of things.


I love a lot of things but when it comes to my work, I'm pretty ruthless on myself, but that's a great regulatory mechanism for keeping sanity. Yeah with something that's public because you're doing it publicly. So you are exposed to all these People's perspectives and Views and criticisms and praise and and both of them are equally toxic, right? The criticisms can change the way you feel about yourself to the point where you could you know, lose all self-respect and hate yourself and and you know, and and just want to argue with everyone who doesn't like you but also the praise you can get delusional and you could start to think that you know, you are someone special you are different than the rest and you won't you don't have to try so hard and everything you do is amazing and that's probably worse.


I think it's probably We better to be like ruthlessly self-critical then ruthlessly self-congratulatory. I think that's actually probably more time not actually I definitely think it's more toxic and the people that I know that lean in that direction, they all turned to shit like the their work suffers, they lose their ability to understand whether or not they're doing something good or bad and one of the things that people always say when someone becomes successful as like, how do you remain relatable? Like, how do you how do you maintain In Clarity, but that's that's the introspective part. That's the ruthlessly introspective part. Like, I don't think I'm any different than anybody else and I'm constantly telling people like all I've ever done is just keep working and grinding and so like if you're on a path and you're running and you're running for five minutes, well, you're going to get you know, you're going to get x amount of feet thousands of feet ahead a mile ahead or whatever going to get.


But if you're running for five days, you're going to get further. It's just natural. If you run for five years, you're going to be further. You're going to run for 10 years 15. It's it's just a grind you just keep going and if you find yourself 10 years into the run and you go look how far I've gone. I am amazing. I am the best. I am a no. No, you just kept going. That's all you've done. Anybody could keep going and get better. If you pay attention you pay attention to what you're doing and you are ruthlessly critical and you do have those. Days where you do something that you don't like well then you don't do it that way anymore and then you think about what you did wrong you think about what you could do better and you apply that information and you apply some hard work and some discipline and you keep fucking going and as long as you do that, you're going to get better even in something that doesn't seem like you get better at it like with conversations, but you do you do get better at it.


You get it there's an art form to conversations where you can make it in a way where the people that are listening it resonates think it's nice. Stu here, they like Yeah, I think more than anything it there's an intimacy in these conversations, right? I mean right now I could completely presume that there is nobody listening to us and it's just two guys talking to each other in a very, you know, familiar intimate way and I think people pick that up and even on my own show. I think that's exactly what happens. I often notice when people come on the show before before I turn on the camera, they're nervous, but then I, you know set them at ease and say look forget about the fact that there's going to be some people watching.


In just have a normal conversation with me and then within five minutes you see the morphology of their face change because they really just get into it. Yeah, and and I think it really speaks to you know, there's this old kind of adage that you know, people have short attention spans. They want, you know Clips to be 3 minutes long and my goodness has your show proven that to be you know about as incorrect as you can get because again, people are your speaking and people's brains, right? By the way, people were so upset when my latest book. I didn't do the narration because they had so gotten used to my voice that I received. I mean, I don't want to say hate mail because they were very polite and they were fans but they said we are so disappointed that you didn't narrate your own book because people didn't you so I say, yeah, thank you for asking.


I asked by the publisher. So my public the publisher sells the rights of the book to an audio publisher and I Also the audio publisher look I can narrated myself and they said no, you know, we have in-house narrators and we're just going to go with that. So I don't know if it's because they don't want to set up the system for me to do it or maybe they thought it wouldn't alter the bottom line sales, but they I proposed it. They said no and I said fine. So that's a huge error on their part and I wish I could talk. Yes, and I wish I had talked to you before and I would have had you insist that you narrate it. Yeah, and I agree with your fans fuck that. X-book redo this one man.


Read you all. I always tell people when you have as deep and a silky voice as mine, if I were to narrate my own voice at my own book, it would be distracting. So maybe I'm doing them a service by having a solo guy read the book. No. No, is there a way to fix this? Can you contact them and redo it around your baby around to? Oh man, they should do it right now. They should do it right now. Yes a hundred percent. You should be narrating your own book for sure. First of all that Your thoughts and your words and your writing who better to read your writing than you it should only be you should never been a consideration that anybody else would do it. I mean my only concern to be honest with you was I mean, yes, you're right that the whole book should be narrated by me but because I use a lot of sarcasm and humor and satire and the book has a lot of personal anecdotes.


I was worried that the narrator might not be able to pick those now based on what Michaels Shermer listen to the audio book early before it was released and he said that the guy did a reasonably good job. So I'm going on his opinion, but maybe you're right. Maybe I should have done it on the well schirmer's being very charitable. It's good. It's good a job is that guy could be it's like listen if you wanted to have someone read George Carlin's act wouldn't that be a fensive when you want to hear those words from George Carlin's voice you would true you have the same way with your work man. There should have been no consideration whatsoever to anyone else doing it.


I'm gonna take that small clip that we just had in. I'm going to send it and shove it up the behinds of my publisher foolish. They do that all the time. They did it with my friend Steve rinella and then as the rights ran out, he eventually got the rights and re he has a book on the American buffalo. It's a fantastic book and it's a really a brilliant book about his own journey to understand native American buffalo, and it's a great book, but it's great. Later with his voice narrating it and he was upset because the publisher did not want him to narrate it initially just like they did with you. They had someone else do it. They had no attachment to the words. They didn't resonate with it. Didn't mean anything to the guy he was just an actor reading and I'm sure the guy reading your shit is just an actor too.


That's crazy. Have you have you thought about maybe dipping your polymath toes into writing a book? Yeah have actually I write a lot. And I've been writing a lot lately especially during the pandemic has spent quite a few hours sitting down and thinking about that. Very thing. I had a book deal in the past, but the The interaction that I have with the Publishers and with an editor was so frustrating that I gave them their money back. But this was what was what was the problem? They just wanted to be like stand-up. They wanted me to write stand up essentially and even offered to pay me to just take my act and just transcribe it and I said that's ridiculous.


That wouldn't work. Like don't don't do that. Like that's crazy. So then what's the audiobook going to be me doing stand-up with no audience? That's so dumb. Like that's ridiculous. I'm not doing that and I then I wrote some things and they you know, I wrote some weird things like my thoughts about sometimes I act as if life is a simulation like a act with the knowledge that life is a simulation. I like literally go and I approach every every interaction of my day occasionally with the idea that life is simulation. I did it in a humorous way but in a way that You know the concept is of course, you know this if there is a simulation that's so good.


You cannot discern whether or not it's a simulation. How do we know whether or not we're in it right now and when you talk to, you know, really intelligent people that have studied this over and over again, they say that's highly likely but that is the case. We will one day reach the point where simulations won't be discernible. How do we how do we know if we're in one right now? And I was I was saying that I And some of my time behaving as if I'm in a simulation and that this is these the benefits that they're like, this is too weird and I'm like, yeah, I think weird like sometimes I think weird like this is I and they were like we wanted to do like have like punch lines and each each sentence like stop.


I'm going to give you a little back, you know, I got to tell you I mean, so this is for aspiring authors who are listening to this show you touch on a very important point the relationship. a ship between the author well and the Publishing House in general, but the editor who's handling your book is really akin to a marriage because you are ultimately sharing with that person the first draft of your intimate thoughts write your book is your baby and so in my case my editor would for this / the person like mine was just the perfect guy because you know when you send off the first draft, I mean you're scared right because you I think it's a great book.


You think you've done a great job, but you don't know nobody's looked at it yet. This is going to be the first guy who's going to actually look at it. Is he going to say what the hell are you talking about or is he going to be and so the feedback that I got from him was really just one main thing. There was very little he said look your book is too long. We need to make sure that when people are reading this book, they can't put it down you currently are at I think it was my first draft I gave to him was 93 thousand words. He said we need to to scale it back to about seventy thousand words, but he was very polite and sharing that feedback because he knew that it's tough to tell an author who spent time agonizing over every syllable.


Hey cut off 23 thousand words from your baby, but I think you have to come with the humility and you can't be the type of guy who says I am not going to change a goddamn syllable in my book. And so I actually took his feedback to heart. I did make the cut. And I think the book is much stronger for it. So I really think there's got to be this unbelievable trust and intimacy between the editor who's handling your book and yourself if that relationship doesn't work. Well, I think the book will suffer. I don't blame the publisher or even the editor I this is before I got the book deal before I had a podcast. So right they I don't think they understood that I just like to talk about shit.


Sometimes they wanted me to approach it like a stand-up comic writing a book. Like a book with a lot of comedy in it and and you know, like if anybody goes back and reads my old blog entries, they weren't like that like some of them were humorous and some of them were just weird. Some of them were just strange thoughts that I have about life and and often times that's how I would write stand up in general. I would write essays long essays and add those essays. I would extract a few sentences those sentences would become bits and that's how I would come up with comedy. I would do it like I was Meaning like when you're mining, you're not getting all gold. You're getting a lot of dirt and you got to like shift through that dirt and then I'd find the nuggets and I'd set those nuggets aside.


And then that was my process. But in the process of doing that I would write a lot of things where I was expressing myself on unusual and bizarre topics and they weren't into it does the first time that you shit that you introduce new material for? Some you know to someone is it for example, will you do the bit in front of your wife before it goes out on the road or the first time is in front of an audience always yeah, always always first time in front of an audience always occasionally. I'll say something on a podcast and it's funny and then that becomes a bit but most of the time I have an idea and the first time I say it what I'll do is I'll make a shit sandwich meaning I'll do a bit.


That's I know works and then in between that bit I'll sandwich in this new stuff and then It sucks then I'll go on with a proven bit afterwards. So it's beautiful if you have material already because you have like little scaffolding. And so one of the things that I do every time I release a Netflix special you have a special and then you have all this time off after the special you have to write a new special. So I have usually about three to six months between the filming of a special to when it airs. So during that time I make a lot of shit sandwiches, so I have those bits that I know work and then I sandwich in this new stuff and then some of the new stuff is great right off the bat it's rare, but occasionally you have a finished product like from the paper to the audience and it works right away and you you've nailed it it resonates but a lot of times it's not like some some bits they take forever to figure out and you got to figure out you've got to attack it from all these different angles and it could drive you crazy and I saw a recent show that you were on or whatever cam.


A documentary. I think it's called The Comedy Store. I'm really enjoying it. Actually my wife got into it too. And the last one that aired last week. It was you know, it featured you heavily where you were talking about, you know the comedy store and what is the name of the woman that ran it Mitzi Shore made seizure, right? And I remember ice. I mean, I'm going to link what I'm about to say to what we talked about earlier in terms of trump getting the approval, you know that he wants and I was I was moved by how you were. Moved when you first had midsi say to you. Hey, you're funny. I mean that in a sense demonstrates that we're all looking for that ego stroke from the person that we care about and this particular case for you.


The Holy Grail was for Mitzi to give you her improve mature. And once you got it, it was like you had won the Nobel Prize, right? Yeah. It was one of the happiest moments of my life because it was like that was Mecca Comedy Store for when I started out doing stand-up in. 1988 in Boston I had heard about The Comedy Store from everyone everyone talked about that is where Sam Kinison started that is where Richard Pryor used to perform and you would hear about all the greats Robin Williams all these different people who worked out at the comedy store in La and you would see video of it on television and you would see these these comedians that you knew with the greatest of all time and they all came out of this one place and there was this one woman who it was Is her vision and she's without a doubt the most important person in the history of Comedy outside of comedians.


It's Mitzi Shore. She's the number one. She she allowed the lunatics to run the Asylum and it's a it's a bizarre family there where the only currency was. Are you funny? It didn't matter if you're a woman or a man or gay or straight or black or white or Asian or east Indian or whatever the fuck you were. Are you funny? And if you're not fuck you that place was ruthless it was but if you were funny and you made it you became a paid regular you were you were in this very small group of human beings. There's probably I would say a thousand legitimate professional comedians on the planet Earth out of those 1000.


There's maybe five hundred that are really good that can head. Line in like in a theater or an arena or a sellout a comedy club. They have a following people come to see him might be less than that. I might be being charitable. It's a small group of people because it's such a brutal business on your self-esteem. It's such a brutal business on your emotions and it's so hard to get good, you know, you can start off kind of good but to be consistently good over and over and over again to put out consistent specials to consistently improve. So much work and most comedians. This is a terrible thing to say, but it's true they become good and then they start to suck they get to a point where they get that adulation like we're talking about and they embrace it and that's all they want.


They don't want to grind anymore The Comedy Store forced you to grind because you weren't just performing for your audience. If I was going up on any given night. I'm not just performing for my audience. There's people there that are there to see Whitney Cummings. They're there to see Iliza Shlesinger that there to see Joey Diaz. Has the data see Anthony Jeselnik, I'm just one of many many many people that are on the line up and they're all killers all these comedians just because you know Ali Wong they just be smashing smashing smashing and you go on after them. You got to bring the heat and you're also trying to work out new material and it's a gym and it's like it's also there's like a family aspect to it. Everybody's like especially over the last decade in particular because comedy over the last decade we realized that it's not we don't have to have a Famine mentality anymore because everybody in the past was all competing for a limited amount of slots on television to everybody was competed for parts in a movie or Parts on television shows or the host of The Tonight Show and it was like a very dog-eat-dog sort of environment then with podcasts the atmosphere changed and then it became know we helped each other you get on my podcast.


We have fun. I tell people to watch your show. I tell people you're going to be at the Chicago improv and then and then everybody realized Like oh no, we're in this together and then it became like a Brotherhood and a Sisterhood. It became a family thing and now it's much much much more supportive than it's ever been in the past. So then The Comedy Store became instead of this like antagonistic sort of battleground. Then it became this place where people go to like refresh and see their peers. So everybody would go on the road. One of the best nights of The Comedy Store was Tuesday night because no one was on the road on Tuesday night because the Tuesday night everybody would come into town and so the people like Sebastian Saga or all these people that would do Madison Square Garden on the weekend.


They would come to The Comedy Store on a Tuesday night to work out new material and we all see each other. So you'd go there on a Tuesday night and it'd be three sold-out shows on a Tuesday night. It was Madness and the lineups were just insane you'd look at the lineup. So you go. Look at this lineup. This is crazy like anywhere in the world. You have to pay so much money to see this line up Dave Chappelle would stop in Chris Rock was there and you would pay 20 bucks 20 bucks and you get to see like the greatest comedy you've ever seen in your life. If and and the word got out and it became this place where consistently it was sold out seven nights a week and that all happened within the last 10 years and specifically from 2014 on when I returned because we had been talking about and that was what that episode of The Comedy Store was all about.


We talked about it so much on the podcast and we talked about me and I would advertise so often about what a great place it is, and I'd have guys like Tom Segura and Bert Kreischer and Ari shaffir on my show and we talked about the fun times we had And people were traveling from all over the world to come to this place and we were there because of the vision of Mitzi Shore we were there because of one woman because she in the 1970s said the only way this is going to work as you let these fucking crazy people do whatever they want and find themselves on that stage and all the all that matters is that you're good. That's all that matters. Are you funny is the audience laughing. Well, then you doing your job everything else?


I don't give a fuck about I don't care about the tree. I don't care about agents. She wouldn't give free passes to anybody and all the other clubs like that the industry and the Agents they would all hobnob and come to these clubs because they would it was their social place. They would get free tickets and free drinks and they would sit there and usually they would become a problem. They talk too much and then get loud and they weren't listening to the comedy and they were drinking too much but not The Comedy Store The Comedy Store. Fuck you pay the money 20 bucks. Like, you know all this is someone from ICM ficam. She would say I don't care about agents. She didn't care about anything but calm Are you funny? And so yeah, I was going to say I think that you mentioned earlier that you know, it's a very tough business to be in because of the rejection and so on I think rejection is such a fundamental part of of life.


I so for example, when I send the paper to to a journal the third to be peer reviewed, I mean the rate of rejections in top journals is in the order of 90 95 % I mean so stop for a second and think what that means right you've just Spent two three four years working on a scientific project. It took you another six months eight months to write it up. You send it to a journal and you have a 90 95 percent chance of it being rejected. And so I always tell my students that you know rejection is really part of being anti fragile, right? I don't know if you familiar with this concept of them. Yeah. Yeah. It's a very good right? So it was a very good friend of mine. Also a fellow Lebanese, right? So antifragility is something that I mean as long as something doesn't kill you, right?


The old adage is squeaky doors don't break, which is basically rewording the concept of antifragility, you know, you and I grow because of the rejections, right? And I think a lot of my graduate students oftentimes are disheartened by the odds of a paper being accepted because they might God I'm going to spend the next 30 40 50 years operating within a domain of Interest where the likelihood of my work being rejected consistently isn't the order of 80 99. 95% it's a tough pill to swallow But ultimately it the process ensures that that which does get published as top quality and I guess in a similar sense.


It's the same for you guys that the person who ends up making it as hopefully funny. There's a I think he told me on the first show that I ever came on your on your podcast you had you had compared what I do to yours, and I probably have all the things you've said to me. That's the one that I remember the most you said, you know, there's something very similar in You doing what I do and that it's impossible to hide the audience will find you out. Right if you if you get into a ring as an MMA fighter, you can't fake it if you get into in front of a stage and you're not funny. You can't fake it. If I get up in front of people and I start espousing stuff. That's garbage. I'm gonna get skewered. And so I really appreciate that because it shows that yes, what we do is is risky, but it's honest if you're good the crowd will tell you that you're doing a good job.


Job, and the way to get better is through struggle. And yeah, the the best moments of my career have come after the biggest bombings I go like there's something about bombing that like wakes you the fuck up. It's such an awful feeling. It's like you got to get better. So if I look back on the beginning of my career, like there was moments where I had horrible horrible shows where I just ate shit on stage, but after that I had a big growth spurt because I realized what Wrong, I never wanted it to happen again and I restructured and I got better and I worked harder and that's that's what is it that goes wrong. Usually is it but literally the joke or the anecdote that you're telling is you've overestimated how funny it is, or is it that the delivery the timing?


What is it? That's not working that you say this bit is going into the Dustbin. It could be any Factor. There's a number of factors. It could be your attitude that you you carry with you on stage you. Could be too cocky or too confident and not engaging enough. Not not not not. I don't want to see not even not it's not humble but connected to the idea of expressing the bit rather than you killing on state or some people. Just want to go up there and be great, you know, but what you really have to do is don't don't think I want to be great. What you think is what is the best way to get this into people's minds and what?


Best ways to be completely tuned in to what you're thinking and what you're saying to be locked in focused and also you it's got a resonate with you. You have to really think this is funny you me and it takes a while to figure out what about it is funny to you because you're so close to it. You wrote it you're sitting there with it. You don't after you've written it and Rewritten it three or four or five times. Maybe it's not even that humorous to you anymore. You have to figure out how to make it humorous and the way you got to do that as a lot. It's one of the Rare art forms, will you need an audience to really put it together to create it and you might get a bad crowd you might get a crowd that's drunk. You might get a crowd that just had a Heckler thrown out five seconds ago and people are upset.


You might get a crowd where the person before you had a terrible set and the audience is like why are we even here this show sucks? And then you got to kind of re in re-energize them and re-engage them. They might have a preconceived notion of who you are when they look at you women have a problem with that. There's a lot of women that go on stage and Men. Like girl, she's not funny. So women have like a bigger hurt. I think I think comedy for women is probably at least 50% harder than it is for men. I really believe that I did like the perceptions that a lot of men have are very prejudiced towards whether women are not women are funny or not. There's so many different factors, but I think I might have discussed this on a previous show, but one of my former postdocs his doctoral dissertation was on an evolutionary Study of humor.


And the argument was that humor is a sexually selected trait meaning that humor serves as a proxy for intelligence. Right? And so the extent that there are sex differences in the frequency of you know, top comedians and evolutionary perspective would argue that there are stronger selection pressures evolutionary pressures for men to be funny as part of their elaborate courtship rituals than there are for women to be funny. So so for Sample, you know never have the following words been uttered sure Linda you have a gorgeous ass, but you're not funny enough. We're not going to have sex. Right but the other way it certainly has happened where a woman sees a gorgeous guy, but he's a dud he's not funny.


He's not engaging and she decides that he's not the right, you know partner for her, right? That's why women can consistently say, I want a funny guy because they're effectively saying I want a smart guy. I mean, it's hard to be funny and witty and be a dumb guy, correct. Right. And so you're right that it's much harder for women to be comedians. But in part Evolution explains why there are sex differences in terms of the frequency of comedians. Does that make sense? Yeah. It does going back to Christopher Hitchens. He wrote a bit about it in the Vanity Fair right exactly about women not being funny and people I don't matter. How do you explain that using an evolution of perspective? I don't think so, right.


I don't remember his perspective. Was that women who are funny take on mail. Characteristics they usually very Butch and you know and very, you know and use like rose. I think you use Roseanne Barr as an example and some other women who, you know have like a Brash almost masculine perspective on Comedy and it's but to get back to the point. There's a lot of factors when you bomb and I do believe that the bar is higher for women. I think it's more difficult because the perceptions but I just think for everybody it's it's about how much fun you're having up there. It's about how much focus and time you put into the material how much how much time you've spent doing it too.


There's like yeah comedy is in this sense. It's a form of hypnosis. You you learn how to get the audience to think the way you're thinking and when someone's on stage that's doing really well for me as an audience member. I let them think for me like when they're going. I just I abandoned all my But preconceived notions and I just allow them to take me on a journey with their words and their there they're acting it out and it's fun. I love it. I in this one of the things that really has helped me throughout my career that I'm still a fan of stand-up comedy and some comedians lose that you know, they lose they lose the love of watching it as an art form.


Unfortunately. Have you ever met a comedian? Who when you saw their acts you thought they were very funny, but when When you got to know them personally, they were duds and their interactions we because you know, you would think that someone who was you have okay? Oh, yeah, a lot of them. How do you explain that? This guy? Why wouldn't you be funny in your personal life, but funny on stage. I mean shouldn't they translate from one to the other? No, not necessarily because it it's like a musician when they when you know, you meet someone there a great singer should you be where I can thronged by their speaking voice? Yeah. Okay. Yeah, it's when there's a A Comics that are very introspective and very almost there almost shut-ins and they only come alive on stage.


Some of them are miserable and like they they only they only become really funny when they're in front of a crowd and they get to do their thing Richard. Jeni was apparently I didn't know him too. Well when he was alive, I met him a couple of times and this is the one who committed suicide. Yeah. He was one of my favorites. It's he was brilliant, but notoriously a miserable person like I would always ask when in the old days when I would do clubs back when radio was a thing. They take you to morning radio in a town and is usually a guy work for the club. Maybe even a local host who would pick you up at the hotel and they take you and I would always ask like hey who's like the worst person you had to travel with who's the worst person you had to bring to radio and a lot of them would say Richard jeni that she just didn't want to be there.


To be a TV star movie star and it never really worked out but what he was one of the most brilliant comedians ever but even though I love to go see him do stand-up that's not what he wanted. You know, it's like that Billy Joel song The Piano Man, you know sure I could be a movie star if I could get out of this place like that. That was him. He wanted to be something that he wasn't but what he like he didn't want to be on the road all the time just working in the clubs, but what he was for us for Other comedians was one of the best examples of what a stand-up comic could be. He was so fucking good. You know, it's so hard to see his specials and to really appreciate how good he was live me you get a lot off of his specialty was obviously really funny and Brilliant.


It's writing was great. But you would see him alive and you would go goddamn. He would you have Comics like leaving the show shaking their head like I will never be that good. He's so good but miserable in real life. Just not not happy. And not necessarily a funny guy off stage but onstage use one of the greats but you know, it's funny because you when you said that he was miserable in the fact that he was a comedian rather than a movie star it kind of if we Circle back to one of the first points that we talked about when we started this conversation where you said, you know, you're a happy guy and so on it speaks to the importance of really pursuing something that on a daily basis makes you happy.


I mean I get tons of emails from people who say Say hey professor. I finished my bachelor's in this what should I study for? My Master's? What is the marking? What is the market suggesting? I should and I always tell them no, please don't look at it that way because you're going to have to wake up every I mean the place where you spend most of your waking time. Is that your job, right? And the fact that I am happy sure. I'm this physician Lee happy. It's just my innate personality, but I'm also happy because I have a job that I love to do whether I'm writing a book or speaking to Joe Rogan or giving a lecture. You know, I'm always excited by what I'm doing. Therefore. It's hard for me not to be happy. So someone like this comedian this regrettable thing where he committed suicide at that that mismatch between where he wants to be and where he is every day as a therapy for most people they don't commit suicide but they do wake up at 57 saying, you know what I never wanted to be an accountant.


I became an accountant because my dad told me it's a safe job or a dentist or a doctor or whatever and I always tell people I mean, I know it sounds cliche is you have to find what makes you passionate and if you can do that, I think it's one way by which you can guarantee happiness. It's one of the only ways that's I always speak of this quote because it's one of my favorite quotes ever by thorough most men live lives of quiet desperation. Hey, yes that is not where you want to be and everyone's different. You know, some people love to do stand-up comedy. Some people loathe it some people want to be a musician and there and unfortunately, Currently they make furniture, you know, there's a lot of that out there and not everybody can be a rock star right not.


Everybody can be a famous painter and I don't know other than what I do and what I've done my path. I don't know what it would take for someone to be successful in their chosen field. It's not mine. I don't know but for Jenny he he was of an era where if you really wanted to make it you had to be a a movie star that was that was he looked at guys like Jim Carrey and you know and all these people like Jerry Seinfeld to become a television star. That was what everybody wanted. They wanted a thing. They wanted stand up to be the thing that got you to the ultimate goal. And now comedy is the ultimate goal for the the this generation of comics, you know, so it's become a different thing fortunately.


Is there something I hope it's not too personal question. That's what your podcast is all about. So there's a theory in Psychology that looks at the psychology of regret. So when you ask people what do you regret the most and they are two possible sources of regret regret of action or regret of inaction. So regret of action would be I really regret that I did this in my life regret of inaction is I really regret that I never pursued that of my life and it turns out Joe that's for most people the greatest source of regret for them our stem. From inactions, right? I regret that I didn't do this. So if I were to put you on the spot and say right now today, what is the thing you regret most in life?


What would it be? I don't have a lot of regrets because I'm of the belief that everything that I've done even the mistakes that I've made they have given me the information and the knowledge that has allowed me to be who I am today and who I am today. I'm trying my best always to be the best version of myself. I'm not always successful, but I Try my best to be the best version of myself and failure is a part of that mistakes are part of that and it when it comes to the regret of inaction. I don't have any of zero regret of inaction. Not a you know, not dream of Clinical Psychology. We clinical psychologist would be out of business as everybody was made up of Joe Rogan's.


Well, I've been it's insanely fortunate. I have three dream jobs, you know, I'm a color commentator for the ultimate fighting. Championship, I'm a lifelong martial artist. That's a dream job. I'm a professional stand up comedian. I've worked the biggest venues. I have the most fun. I have great friends dream job podcasting, which I never even thought was a job because become this amazing job, and it's a I love doing it. I love it. I know when I was leaving my house today. No one else going to get to talk to you online nothing but happiness. Just I was looking forward to it. Nothing nothing regretful about it at all. I'd ever 0 Gratz in terms of inaction all any regret that I have of action the things that I've done wrong or you know, people have wronged or things I said that I should have said has made me a wiser person.


So I don't even have regret in that. I mean sorry to interrupt your I would I would also say that having a family home. That's true Solace is a really an important part. So for me, you know when people ask Let me know. How do you how do you handle the stressors of your life? Well, I know that when I come home, I have my children whom you've met I have my wife and they really are my Solace. It's in other words. There is nothing I'd rather do when I have some free time then to be with my family than to be with my wife. She really is my best friend. And of course there is no prescription for how you can guarantee that you can pick the right life Runner but really try to make that decision as carefully as you can because that's Of can be either a source of great happiness or terrible misery?


Oh terrible misery. I know so many people whose lives have never really worked out because they've chosen the wrong people and they've had these insane relationships. He's terrible, you know, combative relationships with their significant other it's but you have to be the person that attracts a person that is a quality human being true. If you don't have anything to bring to the table you're you know, if you're filled with Self hate and Loathing and anger and all the jealousy and pettiness and that you're not going to get a person who is a good person. It's not it's not going to happen. You got to fix yourself like so many people think they're going to find a person that person going to make them happy.


Now, I think people enhance your happiness it certainly makes you happier, but you have to figure out who the fuck you are. You have to work out your own bullshit if you want to have a good person in your life because a good person is not going to be Tracted to someone who's all fucked up. They're not going to want to be around you you're gonna be a problem for them and you should in a non selfish way. You shouldn't want to have a good person in your life. If you're a mess because you're going to fuck up their life and I feel like at the desk, but I agree with you having a family and having people that you loved and loved ones if without that you don't feel complete people need love and it's such a you know, it's such a cliche thing to say, you know, all you need is love it's not all you need.


You need food and shelter. Shelter and but if you have everything but you don't have love you will be fucking miserable. There's so many people that are successful but they don't have love and those people that's a they've it's an imbalance. Right? I mean this the the standard cliche of the billionaire CEO who work 16 hours a day and is you know, it has on his fourth marriage and has a bunch of kids that are drug addicts because he was never there and you know on / he successful but his real life is a shambles because he spent all of his time concentrating on accumulating wealth and accumulating power and none of his time on himself and and how he interacts with other people and being a good father and being a good husband and being a good friend and and being a just a decent human being and sometimes those are the hardest things to do.


It's easy to concentrate on. Ask at hand, you know, if you just distract yourself from your own barbaric humanity and just think only about accumulating numbers in a bank account. I mean, that's that's Michael Douglas in the movie Wall Street, right just read interact at without giving any names. I have family members who have been of that type who really have never fostered long-term friendships when I say family members. I don't mean my own family right my I mean my my family of birth Where they've become they became very wealthy where they collected Ferraris and Aston Martins and I've told I've worn these family members that you know life is long.


And if one day your to lose your money and I hope that you don't the trajectory is not a good one and I hate to say that it's turned out that way because you know love is a protective Bell. I mean we get older right so and when you get I mean you should always as be accompanied by great quality people around you, but if you should certainly have those great quality people as you enter the golden years of your life and I think regrettably for some of these high-flying kind of players. They think that the party is going to go on forever and it isn't and so yeah, you know choose carefully who you're going to go to bed at at night because that is one of the sources of Happiness.


Yeah, and also if you get if you're concentrating only on success In terms of financial success and that's what a lot of people do that are in business. Right? You're really your life is fixated on numbers. Your life is fixated on accumulating numbers and it's just it's an empty Pursuit. But it's also a Pursuit that becomes insanely addictive because you compare yourself to the people around you, you know, Mike's Mike's house is 4000 square feet, but my house is 5,000 square feet and then you happy with it until you realize that Steve's house is 7,000 square feet you like fuck and he lives in the the the really the best neighborhood and I live in a not so desirable neighborhood.


It's not as desirable as his and I have a Porsche but he has a Ferrari like, oh my God, you're losing your fucking mind. It seemed a up with the Joneses. Right? I mean, yeah, the positional the positional economy is a real term that captures exactly what you just said, which is by the way, it's not so much and for many things what makes us happy is not so much some absolute level of whatever the currency is, but We have more of it than someone else right? So so I think I might have even mentioned this on a previous show on on your podcast. So for example, if you ask people you know that you are you happy with your sex life. The amount of sex you have is less important than the fact of you having more sex than your close friends, right?


Which shows you again. How much of a hierarchical species we are? We use social comparison to decide whether we're happy or not. Right. Yeah, it's weird. Like what what is I think that for a lot of people goals make them happy achieving goals, you know, like having something that you're working towards and I don't necessarily just mean financial goals. I think that's where people get tripped up as just thinking about financial goals, but accumulating skills getting better at things to me that that makes me happy or at least keeps me engaged in satisfy. There's something about New things that's very rewarding getting better at things very rewarding but not if all you're concerned about is numbers not if you're just doing it to try to achieve bigger and greater like you're talking about the point of diminishing returns.


It comes to financial wealth. I think I think challenges are important like having things you're working towards because they give you this sense that in doing these things and getting better whether that's getting better. We're playing chess or getting better at tennis or whatever pick a thing. There's something about it. It develops your overall human potential when you get better at something you you Flex the muscles and exercise the muscles of getting better of figuring out problems of being engaged when you're stagnant and just doing the same thing over and over and over again with no change your mind atrophies and you're all the speaks to what you said earlier what you said using the covid lon.


Down for self-improvement. So for example, one of the things that I did during the covid lockdown as I said because I now addicted to this step counting thing. You know, that's on my iPhone. I said, you know, I wanted to always maintain at least 14,000 steps per day. So it was a very concrete goal. Right? I knew that I had to reach that Benchmark and it didn't matter if at you know, ten o'clock at night. I have to go walking around the block eight. Times that I can hit that Mark I was going to do it and so by doing that it gave me great satisfaction because I could look now at the last seven eight nine months and see that my pedometer is showing that I've maintained this very specific objective.


And so that feels good. It's funny because there's a book that I read recently by Adam alter its called irresistible and it's about addiction to technology and one of the things that he talks about this one of the most addictive things for people is These fitness trackers. Yes people get addicted to step counts and you know how much exercise and exertion they put forth in a day and either even though it can masquerade as a positive for some people particularly people with addictive personalities. It can become a real problem. But yeah in my case, it's been good. By the way, I was recently on I don't know what you think of her, but I was on the the the podcast of Jillian Michaels that was super fun.


It was really which by the way again shows you all of all of these incredible connections that today we have and what world would I you know a professor of evolutionary psychology and so on have connected with Jillian Michaels, but apparently she was a fan of my show and invited me on. So again The Social Network stuff allows, you know meetings of Worlds that you would have never thought possible 10 15 years ago. Yeah really does I don't know much about her. I know she's like a weight loss lady. She makes people lose weight, right? She gets a flat that's original claim to fame. She was on the The big loser show what she does after I don't know but I joke the there at the start of the show. I told her that you know, when I invite people on my show, I have all sorts of illustrious people most of whom my wife never batted an eye, but what she found out that I was appearing on Jillian Michaels should all tell her I'm a fan tell her I'm a fan.


So apparently I finally got street cred by appearing on Jillian Michaels. Yeah. She's supposedly like a hard-ass right? Like she is a tough lady. Get after it. Yeah. Well, I'm a fan of people are motivated. I feel as though there's you've been remiss and pointing to the fact that I'm about 20 pounds lighter than the last time that you saw me when I was on your show. I think a little shout-out from Joe Rogan saying well done. That would have been the appropriate thing for you to do but I'll forgive you. How can I know all I see is your shoulder their head you don't see it, but the face is thinner of it nothing. You look good. I'll tell you that.


I don't know it is. Twenty pounds so that's great, which I still have a lot more to lose but certainly from my maximum point. I'm allowed actually a bit more maybe about 25 pounds down. That's great. What did you do to do that? You know for me, it really has to be about almost turning into a Gestapo concentration camp. My wife keeps track of my calories. She turns into dr. Mangle a she makes sure that you know, I'm getting this way once I deviate from that sort of narrow path. Then I become a sumo wrestler very quickly. Yeah. It's for me. It's pasta is that you?


Yeah, and it goes right to my gut. There's something about pasta and bread. And I can just swell up on pasta and bread when I cut all that stuff out and I just eat vegetables and meat. I just slim right down. It's my weakness for I guess it's the Italian in me. My weakness is pasta and I don't eat a small amount of it either. I eat Preposterous amounts of food. I have always a monster. So the matter right I've always eaten ridiculous amounts of food, but but ridiculous I eat meat I'm pretty easily satisfied, but there's something about carbon Hydrates, like especially pasta that I could just keep funneling that stuff in my face even after I'm like, I'm already full.


I know I'm full. I shouldn't be eating more and like one more mama and and then after that Sugar eaten cake and pie and and whipped cream on it. I just, you know, I get gluttonous. I'm a gluttonous person. You know, there's there's an ongoing joke not I am sure you probably don't check it because you know, you probably got tired the million times on Twitter, but I Sometimes I will post something decadent. I'm eating and then I will write please forgive me Joe Rogan. Hi Santa so somehow you've managed to incorporate yourself in my culinary conscience. So that every time I eat something bad Joe Rogan is on my right shoulder, you know insulting me.


Well, I'm sorry about that. Or maybe I'm not sorry. Maybe it's helping you. I mean sometimes like like that's the thing people love that term fat. Ashaming to use it as a pejorative, but there's something about fat shaming that can motivate you someone says it's like we were talking about earlier things that feel bad like often times they'll force you into action, you know, and I don't want to hurt anybody's feelings. But sometimes their feelings need to be heard a little in order to prod them into action and you can do that with people. It's just like, who do you do it too who needs it who would be thankful and who gets really badly hurt by it, you know, and it's I had written I had written an article on my psychology that they call him defending Jillian Michaels whom we just talked about a second ago because she had gone after but in a very polite way she had gone after lizzle saying well sorry, but I'm not gonna celebrate her body because it's not good for her to be this overweight and suddenly she was this monster not see because how dare you not celebrate Liz those body and so on and and I said, well, I mean are you insane?


Why should she be celebrated? She's a fitness expert a health expert. Why should she be celebrating? Someone being 300 pounds overweight or whatever she was and so I had actually defended her. So you're exactly right the truth sometimes hurts, but we need to say it. Well someone especially like Jillian Michaels. I mean that's her expertise. She's a fitness trainer, you know for her the idea of getting that big is preposterous and the idea of celebrating and say everybody's beautiful. Well, that's that's ridiculous. That's not the case, you know duty is rare. That's why it's so celebrated. Because when someone does achieve an amazing body, we know how hard it is to do especially harder hard. It is to maintain Jillian Michaels has had a beautiful body for a long time.


I mean, that means she's incredibly disciplined. Of course a person like that is going to look at someone who's not disciplined at all being celebrated for her body and go that's ridiculous and she's right because there's Health consequences to being that big and to in ignore those Health consequences, just to make yourself feel good. Good that you're making someone else feel good about being morbidly obese. It's not right. It's not smart. It's not good for anybody. I mean, it's not nice to just make fun of her and shit on her and say terrible things about her that's not nice either but it's not nice to say you look great. No matter what there's that's not really the case. It's not true. And of course by the way, they are marketing campaigns that have become famous in selling that BS right?


So Dove does exactly that it Matter how overweight you are. We're all equally beautiful. So it is what's on I teach that's a marketing in my in my business school. I say yes. It's a very effective advertising campaign because it empowers women. But if you are a truth purest you really puzzling BS because we're not equally Beautiful Beyonce is not as desired as lizzle. You mean Beyonce's more desired for me. I'm has desired meaning more. Tired more desire than little clearly. Yeah. She has a perfect body. Yeah. Well the the weird thing is that that doesn't apply to men like nobody looks at a man with a fat gut and goes you're beautiful no matter what nobody says that like ma'am get me my place.


Well because I mean, of course women do look at Men's physical markers, but not to the same extent because in a sense men can compensate for some of their physical shortcomings by doing well in other metrics, right? So you're going to have a guy who's very funny who's maybe not the tallest but he has great personality or a dominant personality about what it's comes to physicality. It's difficult to compensate for that. You know, you either are facially symmetric or you're not right. So on some traits we can compensate for them on others. They're sort of deal breakers, right? Yeah, I guess but it's in a way it's really sexist to women, right because we're saying you're only valuable if your body looks good and will lie to you.


And so you'll be body looks good. No matter what girl, you have beautiful. It's like you're treating them like they're children. Whereas with men, you know, you see a guy who's fat and look at that slob, you know, and you're allowed to and no one will say You're fat shaming and known says you're fat shaming men. It's always fat shaming is always in response to someone saying something about a woman's body. I'm you never men who are fat or funny. It's like it's humorous to see it like my friend Bert Kreischer when he goes on stage. He takes his shirt off. So you can see his gut and he does stand up. It means in Chicago recently did an outdoor shows 30 degrees outside. He said he did it with no shirt on I'm like that is hilarious. So committed to showing everyone his gut that he did if he just but he's Chris Farley Chris Farley perfect example, John Candy was another great example like but for a guy like that like there's no fat shaming.


It's not like, you know, you say to Chris Farley. You're beautiful no matter what because that's not You know, it's not true, but it's okay that you say it to a man that it's not true. It's okay that you tell him he's fat. But again, that's just because the personhood of a man is not as clearly tied to his physicality that I don't think that that sexism it's called. It's called Evolution, right? For example the trajectory of the mating value of men and women changes throughout their life history. Right? A woman is more desired all things considered when she's 20 then when she's 80 that's not because life. Life is Aegis. That's because it's called biology. Whereas a man's making value increases right you and I were more likely to be rejected when we were 20, then we are today because we have more status has a so, I don't think that life is sexist or ages.


There are certain incontrovertible truth about our reality and we just have to deal with them isn't it funny to the people want to deny those incontrovertible truth about reality of they don't make them feel good exactly. Exactly. That's that's yeah, it's really unfortunate. But it's really funny that some of the people that also say that you shouldn't body shame. They're the same time people to make fun of Donald Trump for having small hands, you know it is it's that it's like whenever it's convenient, you will forgo those rules. Wow, that's that's hypocrisy one of the curses of The Human Condition. Yeah, there's so many curses of The Human Condition aren't there.


It's funny. It's a even if we're aware. Of them. We still can't help fall into those pitfalls. That's why there's something called the seven deadly sins. Right? It's because moral philosophers and theologians were well aware of many of the quick sand traps that we could fall into and they put them into a easily digestible list for us. Right? Well, that's why it's important to have psychologists like yourself who explain exactly what's going on in the mind that's forcing you into these weird little traps and holes. Thank you, sir. Do you so Book that you put out the parasitic mind. We've barely talked about it. This the book. Is it out right now. It came out on October 6 so far is doing really well.


Very excited by it basically is the story of many of the things that we've been talking about all the years that I've been coming on your show, which is they are a bunch of these terrible ideas these idea pathogens that were spawned on University campuses because it takes intellectuals to come up with really dumb ideas and up. So I trace what these bad ideas are how they originated and then I offer solutions for how we can protect ourselves against these bad ideas how we could vaccinate ourselves against this ordered thinking now, I'm sure these ideas in the way you're describing. It makes some people uncomfortable like they upset people. Have you had it have you had a lot of criticism about this book so far not too much criticism because I like to think that I've done a pretty Good and temper job in presenting the evidence?


So one of the things that I try to explain in the book is that each of these bad ideas start off with a kernel of truth, but then in the end some noble cause but then in the pursuit of that noble cause the idea gets distorted and it becomes parasitic. So for example, when it comes to feminism Equity feminism is a great idea because it basically says that men and women should be equal under the law there. Should be no institutional, you know sexism we could all agree to that but in the pursuit of that original Noble goal, we shouldn't then say as do militant feminists say that there are no innate biological differences.


Everything's due to the social construction. We need to make men and women indistinguishable in the pursuit of the original goal when it comes to transgender activism. It's the same story you and I can both be fully in favor of transgender rights as I think we both are but that doesn't mean that We reject biology what I call bio phobia and arguing that a 275 pound guy who set six-foot-seven who decides to call himself Linda tomorrow. He can fight the MMA against women who are 1/3 his size. And if you say otherwise you are transformed and so what I basically argue in the book is that each of these terrible ideas started off from a good place, but then at metamorphosized into a complete departure from reason and then I offer Ways by which we can sort of retake reason and logic and science from these parasitic ideas.


Now when you construct a book like this, do you look at it in terms of how people could potentially criticize these ideas and what arguments they would have against what you've proclaimed. Well, I what I try to do is offer a way by which it becomes difficult to argue against me because the evidence is Two great in my favor. I always tell people that when I walk into a room if I walk with the requisite Swagger, it's because I know what I know but I also have epistemic humility. Meaning that if you were to today ask me Joe give me your position guide on the legalization of marijuana.


I would tell you know what I simply don't know enough about the story. I haven't done my homework. I haven't built to use a term from my book. I haven't built that no more logical network of females and evidence that would allow Me to pronounce a definitive position. And so I think if I've done a good job in the book, I will have communicated to people away by which when they are constructing arguments, they can do it void of Hysteria. If I want to prove to you Joe that toy preferences are not socially constructed. I can prove it to you by bringing data from across cultures from across time periods from across disciplines showing two showings to you that toy preferences have a biological For Signature.


I don't need to get hysterical. I don't need to get emotional and so I'm offering people an epistemic logical truth in establishing went to know that something is truthful or not. The that make sense. Yeah, how have you ever debated someone who disagrees with your positions on these things someone who has maybe a social justice Warriors perspective on these ideas. Yeah. It's called Tuesday 99% of my Waking Life doing nothing. But that are you doing my blood pressure is higher because of that, right? So yes, but but but in all seriousness, I face it both in my public engagement meaning to say on social media or whatever but also in my scientific career as I think you and I might have spoken in the past.


I've always faced that consistent debate because many of my colleagues in the social sciences even till today are very very resistant to accepting the idea that biology matter. When it comes to human Affairs, right as I think we've discussed in the past and so so it's really in a sense this book. I've been writing it for 25 years because I have seen you know, I tell him in chapter one of the book. I basically say that I faced to Great Wars in my life. The first war was the Lebanese Civil War when I was a child and the second war has been the war on reason logic and science that I have experienced as a professor of 26 years some of the stuff that is being taught and promulgated in the universe.


These is absolutely insane. I mean, it's people think that I'm making it up and I'm being satirical when I say these things but you now see the downstream effect of all those bad ideas, right? You're seeing it an HR department's you're seeing it in the training in the military. You're seeing it in political parties. So these ideas starts off in the universities as some esoteric nonsense, but but with enough Force they become mainstream stuff and will these people graduate from those universities and they go on The workforce with these Notions that they have and these Notions are reinforced by the other people that are their age that graduated along with them and they want to reshape Society in this these ideals and then one day they get older and then they get a mortgage and then they get a job and they get a family and they go what the fuck was I doing but they've already started this process.


It's interesting that you say this denying of biology and its effect on human. Affairs it's such a strange thing because it's clearly a factor. It's clearly it's it's a significant thing. It's a we know it's a real it's a real thing but it's the denying of this particular factor is very strange because it may get it comes from a hopeful place, right? Because yeah, imagine if we can argue that your child and mine has equal probability to Come the next Lionel Messi or Michael Jordan as Lionel Messi or Michael Jordan.


We're all born with equal equal potentiality. We're all born on equal footing. We're all born probably La Raza. So again that speaks to my point earlier, right these idea pathogens free us from reality, but they do so in the service of kind of a feel-good noble cause but it is perfectly detached from reality men and women are not biologically the same. We're not all likely to become Michael Jordan transgender people have every right to live free of bigotry, but they shouldn't compete with biological females if they're trans women. And so again, I think the difficulty is that for most people who are social justice Warriors.


They think that we can't chew gum and walk at the same time. I could be for all of these Noble causes without ever murdering a millimeter of Truth. Yeah, and the physical issue is very strange too because All variables there are so real and to deny that as a factor as a real factor in who you are and what your potential is. That's one of the reasons why sports are so interesting right? Like a person like me really doesn't have a chance to compete against LeBron James. I just, you know, just it's not going to happen. Just there's it's not on the table and to deny that it seems foolish to deny physical differences and it's one of the reasons why sports are so interesting is you get to see these freaks you get to see these rare people that can do things that you know for a fact if you had a million years to practice you could never achieve the things that they're doing.


And by the way John Watson at like the one of the founders of behaviorism are you'd basically and I have the exact quote in the book that you know, give me any 12 infants I could turn anyone. Of them into the next beggar the next surgeon the next athlete so he was basically arguing for exactly the physician that you are. So rejecting. Hey, I could turn you into the next LeBron James. If you give me the right opportunity to properly conditioned you and socialize you it's insane. But by the way, even for example in Psychiatry until very recently something as clearly organic as schizophrenia was blamed on the environment right you had a Schizophrenic mother right who hugged you too much or didn't hug you enough.


Of course today. We look back at that and say who believe this nonsense. Well Freud Ian's did right. So so again, it's not as though these ideas are not espouse by Otherwise very smart people John money of Johns Hopkins University who was one of the original sort of gender is a social construction used to advise surgeons. Well, don't worry about it do the Three on this boy and put him in a dress call him Linda and he will be a girl because it was thought that gender is completely due to social construction. It has nothing to do with Biology. So these ideas have real consequences. They're not just some esoteric thing that we talked about in the humanities Department.


Well at one point in time, you were one of the first people that was arguing the dangers of this stuff leaking out of the universities and people thought it was foolish like you're concentrating on something. That's a small. All factions people that are in the universities and has no bearing on the real life, but then we've seen like particularly the protest in Portland where they went on for like, I mean, I think they're still going on so over a hundred days of you know them trying to Light Federal buildings on fire and riding in the streets. It's still happening like that. That is literally those chickens coming home to roost. No kidding. Exactly. Right? Look. I know we've talked about Justin Trudeau previously on your show Justin Trudeau as a walking manifestation.


Of almost every single one of the bad ideas that I discuss and the parasitic mind. He's into post-modernism. He's into diversity inclusion and Equity. He's into cultural relativism, you know, every single one of the Dreadful things that I talk about in the book. He exemplifies it why because he is a product of that educational process. That's what you're supposed to think as a progressive and now that he is prime minister. He institute's each of these ideas. They have real Consequences. I'll tell you a quick story that just happened to me recently. My daughter came to me and told me that her science teacher had an avatar of BLM in their dialogue in there, whatever Zoom or whatever it was called and I thought that was very objectionable.


And so I wrote a very polite but firm letter to the principal saying that it I didn't think that it was appropriate and the pursuit of her pedagogic responsibilities that a teacher would signal her, you know. Mythical affiliations to young children and secondly, I then said but never mind that if you look at some of the positions that are espoused by bln, they're truly grotesque, whether it be the march of stuff whether it be the black supremacist ISM, whether the it be the clear anti-white propaganda. And so I thought is this something that's appropriate for a teacher to be doing well within a few hours. It was taken away. It was taken off right? So that was in a sense me activating my inner honey badger, right?


It's not that I just got on a Joe Rogan show to talk about these ideas in my own personal life. I got engaged and I think that's what everybody needs to do. You need to be engaged in the Battle of ideas because they have truly severe consequences on our children and their children, but there's a lot of people that are afraid they're afraid to engage in the Battle of ideas because they don't want to be labeled a bigot and they don't want to cause people to attack them and they'd rather just keep their mouths shut and complain quietly to their But I already know we were talking about all of the different frailties that The Human Condition suffers from I think cowardice is something that I've always said should be added to the long-standing list of seven deadly sins.


We should have 1/8 sin called cowardice because look I don't want to sound hyperbolic but the the the young folks who landed on Normandy weren't given a guarantee of safe passage. They knew that most of them were To be mowed down like little mosquitoes by the machine guns of the Nazis and yet they said hey, I'll go I'll do it and they did that. They made that sacrifice for that Joe Rogan and God's asking today sit in a free society and have this great conversation. So I understand that people are afraid of real repercussions and I'm not suggesting that people should be Reckless Martyrs. But what I am saying is that you can't simply say I'm too afraid and I've got too much to lose.


Let God's side let Jordan Peterson. Let Joe Rogan put their neck on the line. They've got this they can handle it. No, we each have a small part to play if we all grow a pair and speak out in unison will get rid of these ideas by next Wednesday. If we don't it will be a long ride to hell here here. I think that's a great way to end this we just got to three hours believe it or not that nuts. Just think about it. I felt like it was three minutes. You're just the best man. Unbelievable. Listen, I feel the same way about you. Appreciate you very much your book. The parasitic mind needs to be read by you and the audio book, please whoever's listening audio people the people that are responsible the Publishers, please let God read it, please.


Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, brother. It was an honors as always. Take care of my friend. Bye. Bye. Ciao. Thank you friends for tuning into the show. And thank you to Simply Safe visit Simply Save.com Rogan right now and get a free security camera plus a 60 day risk-free trial with any new system order. There's nothing to lose go today to Simply Save.com Rogan Siem pli sa Fe Simply Save.com / Rogan. We're also brought to you by butcher box. Butcher box makes it easy for you to get high-quality.


Humanely raised meat that you can trust and for a limited time new members can get up for a free Thanksgiving turkey when you sign up for butcher Box by going to butcher box.com Rogan. That's butcher box.com Rogan go there and get a free turkey in your first order. We're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app. That's right, the Mother fucking cash out back at it again download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. And when you do download it, don't forget use the promo code Joe Rogan all one word. You will receive ten dollars and the cash app will send ten dollars to our good friend.


Justin Brands fight for the Forgotten charity making Wells for the pygmies in the Congo and through this promotion. We're very honored and proud to announce that they have built several Wells are in the process. The building many more and they've raised a shitload of money and we're honored and proud to be a part of this and Justin ran is literally one of the nicest human beings in the world. So download the cash app enter the promo code Joe Rogan all one word. You win and 10 bucks goes to an amazing cause and we're also brought to you by whoop and their amazing whoops. Trap giving you a personalized feedback all in real-time with in their amazing application that helps you make some better choices and for listeners this podcast whoop is offering 15% off all memberships give whoop a shot.


And if it's not for you they offer a 30-day return policy. No questions asked head over to whoop. That's wh oop.com enter Rogan Rog am at checkout and save 15% off join whoop today and sleep better recover faster and train smarter. Thank you. My friends much. Love to you all bye-bye.