
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by whoop. Whoop is a fitness tracker the best fitness tracker I've ever used that I wear 24/7 I even have a special strap that I use it when I do kickboxing workout, so it's drops on my bicep. Other than that it sits on my wrist it I see it's on my wrist 24/7. It measures heart rate variability. It measures your resting heart rate and it lets you know how well you're recovering it lets you know, how much sleep Got it gives you a ton of information. It's got a fantastic application and what it does it gives you real personalized Insight 24/7 that quantifies all that data and helps you better understand your body on a deeper level.


Whoop goes beyond just tracking calories and heart rates. It monitors your sleep you're straining your recovery with personalized feedback in real-time all within their app when I wake up in the morning. One of the first things I check is how well I I recovered from the night before how Robert well, I recovered from yesterday's workout and it gives you information like it lets you know, like hey, maybe today would be a good day to go light. Maybe do a little active recovery just rest and stretch or maybe you've fully recovered. It's a good day to get after it lets you really be accountable with what you're doing with your body. Like are you drinking caffeine before you go to bed? What happens when you drink alcohol, which is for me.


It's critical to pay attention this month because this Sober October for me. I fucking love it. I love it for anybody trying to get in shape or just trying to build better healthier habits in general because it gives you real feedback you get real instead of just going on. I feel pretty good it lets you know, well, actually you could be better rested. This is how much rest you're going to need tonight or hey, you did a great job. You're well rested and you could also think about all those habits that you you have whether it's drink. In enough water taking CBD and you can find out how they're affecting you. I love it and for listeners this podcast whoop is going to give you 15% off all memberships give whoop a shot and they're going to give you a 30 day return policy with no questions asked if it's not for you but it's going to be few.


It's awesome head over to whoop this wh oop.com enter Rogan Ro Gan at checkout save 15% off join whoop today and sleep. Recover faster and train smarter. It's the shit for just 30 bucks a month. You get personalized Insight 24/7 that really helps you make better choices that swoop and use a code Rogan save 15% I fucking love it. We're also brought to you by 4 Sigma attic and they're fantastic and delicious mushroom coffee mushroom coffee that doesn't taste like mushrooms, but it's really fucking good for you coffee. It's actually nutritious.


It's coffee with lion's mane, which is my favorite mushroom. It supports productivity and creativity. It's great for the Dome good for the brain. Plus it includes chaga, which is the king of mushrooms for immune support mushroom coffees easier on the gut. It doesn't make you feel jittery. It has about half the the caffeine of regular coffee, but it's actually good for you all for stigmatic products organic. They're all vegan and gluten-free. Every single batch is tested in a third. Party lab for heavy metals allergens bad bacteria yeast Moulds mycotoxins and pesticide to ensure their purity and safety so that you know that what is on the label is exactly what you're getting the highest quality coffee and shrooms possible.


Best of all how about this for stigmatic stands by their products unconditionally with a 100% money back guarantee love every sip or get all that cheddar back. Hundred percent money back guarantee for mushroom coffee. What are you waiting for? And I've worked out a sweet deal for with for somatic on their best-selling lines made coffee and it's just for Jerry listeners receive up to 40% off their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim this you must go to for Sigma attic.com Rogan. Again. This offer is only for JRE listeners. It's not available on the regular website. Go to fo you are SI g.


M-- a TI C.com Rogan get yourself some delicious mushroom coffee full discount applied at checkout and again a hundred percent money back guarantee. So you have nothing to worry about we're also brought to you by Juve Juve is a thing that I've been used in over the last couple of months and I fucking like it a lot is a light machine. I'll get into this now. Listen, I'm always on the hunt for Cutting Edge modalities to enhance my performance and improve my overall health in Fitness and I've long focused on different ways to upgrade my eating my exercise my sleep to keep my body balance working officially, but it wasn't until recently that I learned that sunlight is just as important as diet exercise sleep and hydration and most of us don't get enough sunlight.


Most of us don't realize that we spent over 90% of our lives indoors, which is a lot the downsize you get less sunlight than you need and we're over exposed to Blue Light from our phones computers and TV screens. This is an imbalance of That can lead to negative effects such as inflammation sluggishness disrupted circadian rhythms and poor sleep. Well UV light from the sun helps us create vitamin D, but other Colours and wavelengths of sunlight are crucial for our health as well, like red light and near-infrared light when peer-reviewed research showed that red and near-infrared light are crucial wavelengths for human health. They stimulate the mitochondria in your cells and help you produce more energy red and near-infrared light like juvie.


Devices that I use have also shown to have great results to support healthy skin sleep Fitness and Recovery Juve is the leading red light therapy brand. That's Jo o VV Juve has isolated these red and near-infrared wavelengths of light and it delivers them directly to your skin cells in the comfort of your home with none of the potential downsides of sunlight like skin damage and Juve just launched their next generation of devices. The new products are Sleeker lighter with the same power and they include new features like recovery plus mode for post-workout recovery boost. I fucking love it. I've been using it for a few months and I look forward to it.


It makes me feel good and they've got a sweet deal for a limited time. Juve want to hook you up with an exclusive discount on your first order. Just go to juvie. That's Jo o VV.com Joe and apply my code Joe to your Qualifying order exclusions apply limited time only again. That's Juve Jo o VV.com Joe and use the code Joe. Whoa, we're also brought to you by Squarespace the host of my website. If you go to Joe Rogan.com, that's Squarespace website.


Anyone can make a website with Squarespace. I mean you I'm talking to you. Like I can't I can't I'm not good with computers. Do you know how to make a folder move around on your desktop? Can you drag a folder around? Yeah, well guess what? You can make a website with Squarespace. They've got it dialed in it's very simple to get a simple easy to use drag-and-drop user interface and gorgeous designer templates that will allow anyone to make a beautiful professional website. Each website comes with a free online store. So maybe during this pandemic you got an idea to start a business. Well Squarespace is your huckleberry. You can sell products and services of any kind.


You can promote a physical or online business and they have powerful e-commerce functionality that literally lets you sell anything online. You can customize the look The feel the settings the products and more with just a few clicks. Everything is optimized for mobile, right out-of-the-box built-in search engine optimization free and secure hosting nothing to patch or upgrade ever in 24/7 award-winning customer support or who know? I don't know. Well, you can try it for free. How about that? Oh now I have your attention go to squarespace.com Joe for a free trial and then when you're ready to launch just use the offer code Joe and you will save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.


All right, my friends my guest today is a good friend of mine. He is so many things. He's one of those guys that when I talk to I feel lazy because he just does so much. Shit, he is the lead singer of Tool. He's the lead singer of Puscifer and Puscifer has a new album that's coming out and then they don't just have a new album they but he doesn't just do that. He has a winery owns restaurants like Jesus Christ and he has a new event that is streaming on October 30th, and we get into it. I don't want to get into it too in too much detail because we get into it.


Plea in the podcast and it sounds fucking amazing. He just one of the coolest people I know please welcome Maynard James Keenan to the show. The Joe Rogan Experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day This is how you wearing your mask. Now, I caress because I all I just forget to bring it with me. So I just like hanging on my nose. I just bring it. This is the new move. Yeah, people will do that. Now they will see you and say one side of the watch the chair the miniature schnauzer right here. You have a cute little dog dude. I picture your dog is adorable. Yeah, she's awesome. She's out. What's her name taking a walk mijo mijo and she's 15.


What does me house down for beauty crest of a wave, it's Japanese. Okay deadly little mija from Sin City Which one was that? She had up the swords and all right Earl from the movie Sin City. Sin City was a movie but it was also a comic book Remick book. Yeah machine the comic book as well. I don't know that movie was fucking good man. Yeah, I forgot all about that movie till just now. Yeah, she's named after a deadly little Miho. So we were talking about how well we didn't talk about how the new Puscifer album comes out on the 30th. I listen to what is available and it sounds awesome is a lot layers to that shit man. There's all kinds of Sounds coming at you from all over the place.


Yeah, Matt. Normally what happens with the with our recording process is that I'll have an idea or met will have an idea which is kind of set down a direction. For example, like I'll go mandolin drum machine banjo. Let's just start there and start to see what we can build on this thing. And then you have an album like conditions of my parole on this. He picked up an old fairlight and Making a fair light actually work nowadays. I don't know what the fairlight is. It's just it's a it's a synthesizer and you've heard it on. You know, Peter Gabriel used it Art of Noise. Like I think yes might have used versions like a sink Lobby or a fairlight.


I'm going to get that wrong in math going to just he's got to face it as palm right now. But you know, so there's very specific sounds of Commodities and it's there's a learning curve to go with it. But the cool thing is that it kind of It kind of paint you into us a Sonic corner. And then you start layering on that and then of course unconsciously or consciously you start thinking of all the stuff you heard in in the 80s, you know, that was used on yeah. See you start reacting in that way for those sounds and then, you know Karina coming in on top of me adding her piece and then just that kind of, you know, the kind of 3-way chest that we have going on as a non-musician.


It's always interesting to see like the way people react to synthesizers their sets. Synthesizers got to be one of the most polarizing. Yeah sounds and all but obviously it's responsible for some amazing songs Absol undeniably. Yeah, but for whatever reason people were either love or hate that kind of sound well, yeah, whenever you know when you have people that are like, I don't know man, I like live music, you know, totally loud music. So you're big, you know, and then you kind of wait come back around go would think a craft work while of Kraftwerk. They put robots on station push a button and you pay money to watch the like for mannequins.


It's basically the song She's yeah, but I love Kraftwerk and you know, so but it's funny when people don't quite make the connection of yeah, I don't know what it is. They're saying well, it's it becomes almost an ideological thing. It's like you're opposed to it because it's a non cool thing or something. Yeah. Yeah. I remember when John Came out and everybody was like what the fuck has happened to Van Halen. They lost their mind. What is this? Dude, dude, dude? Meanwhile, one of the biggest fucking songs. They've ever put out. Yeah, massive super Blockbuster. Yeah, but some people were just like this is the end.


Well, I remember living in Boston. We had the classic rock station play F or W CM I think it was might have been BC on what's the other one Ka F BC n BC I think was bcn but it was like it was a classic rock Channel and this is going to be 7 Yeah, 88 I was there and and I remember people losing their shit because they tried to play Van Halen on that station. I like that's not classic rock bro. They are they really were very adamant about like no. No Van Halen is or is hair band. That's like a some kind of Glam Rock thing. They were you know, bostonians just getting their panties in a bunch over Van Halen on bcn.


Yeah. There was a real resistance to hair metal. There's hair band music came around and even Guns and Roses. Has like people put in the Hair Band category in the morning boy. You're splitting hairs. Yeah, absolutely. It's hardly hair band music. I mean, it's yeah Sweet Child of Mine and like, you know, Welcome to the Jungle. These are fucking great songs you it's hard like hairband to me is like I get why people would like it. I understand it, but it's simple it's like it's a piece of candy. Yes, you know, whereas like, you know, Guns and Roses had they put out some find meals, you know, some of their some of their songs were you know, there were it was one meal, but it was a good meal, but they were what well crafted pieces whereas, you know, there's I don't want to name some bands with there's some you know, some bands they were eyelash extensions and fucking crazy hair and boy But we he did it dude.


Yeah, it's right. You're right. Good point. Yeah, but nobody is giving him shit. You can't give him shit. He's well, how undeniable is Michael Jackson that even though people think he most likely did some horrible shit. They still play his music. Yeah, and I've enough the the fairlight is part of some of those records sure. How boom boom boom. That's all those. That's all those synthesized. Talking about when did synthesizers come around? Like what was the first introduction like Wednesday good modern music. I'm having a brain fart.


Damn it. Maybe it'll come from its what it's there's this specific but there was there was sound manipulation that bands start introducing before prior to that right like Hendrix started doing weird shit with petals. And yeah, you got a mellotron which is a kind of recorded on tape and it's looped and you're playing, you know, the recorded sounds on these on these looping cassettes, but that was still kind of analog. Mmm. I'm having there's a specific. Bored and I'm bad at that must be the know why I'm 56 bro, dude. I'm 53. I get it. My brain is my memory is so inconsistent like sometimes it's amazing and sometimes it's just straight dog shit.


Like people have known for 10 years. I can't remember the fucking man doesn't make any sense things that I know what that thing is and I can't fucking it's always good to see George over here George George. His name is Brian. Oh, we should probably explain what's happened. The someone doesn't happen young Jamie got the covid young. Jamie's got a new lady friend and the new lady friend wanted to go to a bar and young. Jamie was like, okay say went to a bar and bars in Texas. They do not give a fuck out here. They go outside and they're on a patio and they just drink like there's no covid and their bumper to bumper with people all partying down and few days later.


Jamie thought he had a sinus infection. He was just all stuffed up and felt Shit only for a day then the next day start to feel better. They after that is like that I can't be covid. He's like, I know I have allergies he has allergies and it's Ragweed season apparently comes in gets tested and the only one we were concerned with is our employee Jeff our friend Jeff and Jeff was actually fairly close to Jamie for a few minutes talking to him. I never got any closer than 20 feet from them and most of the time I was about 30 to Two feet from soon as I found because Jamie came in first and got tested first. And as soon as I found I didn't feel well.


I stayed the fuck away from him. I thought because I was in the room with him. Maybe I would have to quarantine but the doctor said how close were you and I was like no closer than 20 fees like, you know have to worry about it. Just get tested every day. And so I'm three- test in a row, so I'm 99% point nine nine nine percent sure. I'm good. But yeah Jeff. I'm a little worried about so Jeff's not here today poor bastard, but we almost didn't Because I thought the protocol was I was going to have to stay up but they say no they consider close contact six feet are closer for more than 15 minutes. And that really close all that kind of close. Yeah. I wonder if you do you get it from fucking Brian you would know.


Yeah. Absolutely. It's liquids. That's how I got mine. Did you wow amazing, but you fuck so much. How would you know this how you guys I fuck myself? Oh cuz you're not sure. Though. So anyway, and we pulled it off and we did do it. So here we are. The other thing that's coming out tomorrow. Is that a poor? Apparently Rudy Giuliani tries to fuck a fifteen-year-old. Allegedly. Allegedly. Allegedly. What's funny is like apparently his take on it. And again, he's older than us his memories probably terrible because it happened quite a while ago. They filmed this his take on was he was proud that they didn't get him the way they've got other people.


And the article that I was reading last night, it's hot. It's the death of Journalism. It is so goddamn apparent when you read articles and then you see the actual thing and you go what the fuck did you just write because this is not what it is. All right. This is like these takes on things that are so it's there. It's there's so much hyperbole in the Summers exaggeration and bias until we watch it. We won't be able to yeah, so, you know, I'm excited tomorrow. You have me at borat's Borat. Yeah, I mean listen, I still think Ali G in the house is one of the most underrated comedy films of all time. It is good, especially if you like weed I wouldn't recommend it this months sober October, but when sober October's over Ali G in the house, I actually bought a UK version of a VHS player because it was only available on VHS from the UK.


Okay, was it uh VHS Talking about the actual Ali G Series. No, it was a movie. Okay. Oh, yeah, that one's too but a move but even even the series was unavailable over here for a long time long had to like do the conversion. He had a movie. Yes, you're right Brian. It was a DVD. It was an all regions either by an all regions player. And because it like players were limited to like certain region was really weird. I don't have anything. What do you know what the science plan? That is. It's different frequencies. I think was Powell versus H and Scientists theorize and some of them were Universal due to play everything. Yeah, some of the cheaper ones that you could buy like at Fry's I'd like a secret like menu.


You could switch it back and forth. Yeah. That was his the key right was like a cheaper one. Yeah. Yeah, so I had to buy once but I but I literally bought a DVD player specifically for this film me and Eddie Bravo got barbecued and we watch this and could not stop laughing. It's fucking hilarious movie. It's really ridiculous. So apparently that that comes out tomorrow and Rudy Giuliani is allegedly trying to fuck a 15 year old but it wasn't really a fifteen-year-old. She was in her 20s playing fifteen-year-old here goes really GOI speaks out about on bore out to controversy calls. It hit job over Hunter Biden campaign. How could it be a hit job over 200 buying a campaign if they shot it in July bro.


There's there's no logic to it. It's just they're just trying to cover her out. I think they have. Say that I want to know what the girl looked like because they said she was playing a girl was 15, but I believe she's like 25 or something like that. How old is the gal? He lets his hand those pants. Oh Jesus Christ looking for a hunter Biden's laptop another somewhere. I guess he's saying he was tucking in his shirt. But why would he do that? Why not the bed imagine if that was him in your room lying on the bed, but I came in what are you doing? Unless I'll give you have to be a good friend where they were so comfortable they could lie on the bed and adjust their balls, you know, but if you just met a person and you're lying in the bed with the hand on the Awesome.


Yeah with ZF sunglasses on to looks like he's on coke. It's probably smoking it smoking Coke. He's on Viagra. And this is this girl's touching him to she checking off his microphone apparently because well maybe he didn't have the wire tucked because they do talk them down your pants. That is true. Yeah, I would like to see the film The footage of it. We're gonna tomorrow. Yeah, because if that's the only thing that does make sense in his defense like if because sometimes they put those things down your pants and you do got to get in there to get the wire out if he's taking the microphone off. It also and here's here's my back here.


Like drop it down my jacket and put it on the back here. I don't know why you put it in his pants. That's true, too. Yeah, why would you have it in the front? You might have had it in the front pocket so he could sit down they often do that. They'll put the mic in your front pocket as opposed to in your back the backyard because if you sit down on a chair that think digs in your back, I've had it in my front pocket before but the thing is like the gal. See there being pretty good about not showing they're not showing her. Yeah, I want to know like did he know that she was supposed to be 15 or did he just think she was a girl? Here's the thing if she is in her 20s, and this is all speculation, right if she is in her 20s, and she's beautiful.


The problem is he's gross and he's old and a beautiful girl. She was and would have to see the footage. But if she was being flirtatious like he's done. He's helpless he's under Well, it's like an old fucked up like a dude like that if he thinks like oh my God this might like that myself last time I'm gonna have a heart attack tonight. Yeah that a gal who's an attractive young gal decides to put a do it on his lawyer dude in his position has to know that that's coming like the you going to set up is coming. I said up to coming maybe not anymore. Maybe he forgot like he's all doing, you know. Yeah. I mean you gotta think And not only that but he's been under this tremendous stress of being a top lawyer for the most fucked-up Administration The History of the United States.


So it's like the just a the legal shit. He's been battling back and forth. Yeah. It's a shit show. This is a shitshow his brains probably hosed. He's probably in this hotel room going home. This is versus throwing me a bone. Oh, yes it is. Oh, yes a big old bone. Just not for you to chew on it's never stopped. It just never stops. There's like every time you think well the world is going to be normal today. I mean, we've gotten it all out of the way. Nope. No new thing. Arizona is now spiking and supposed cases of covid are they? Yeah, they were spiking for a while, but it was it was young folks and it wasn't an issue.


It was like young folks were getting it. But the deaths were very low you had a bad case right? I don't have a bag. Yes, and no a medium bad. So it was one of those, you know, I In Australia, we went out to dinner my buddy Todd Fox and Chris and immediately food didn't taste right, but this is now this is all hindsight, right? I didn't know at the time. We didn't know that these are the right things you're looking for like immediately. What year was our in what month was Us February? Have you are so similar? Yeah. So this is utterly. It's a nobody said, you know, nobody knew what to tell you. I immediately was sick. Then I had to get out on an international flight the next morning fly to New Zealand.


You're super spreader. Well, yeah, I'm a super spreader you brought it to New Zealand. I brought it brought it wasn't it was in me and I put it in you so we got there. I was like four days in the hotel because they have four days off before the shows. So I was just drinking water hot showers taking care of myself hot tea just trying to get through it and it sucked but it wasn't but you didn't know yet that like what how bad this thing could have been if I don't know how bad it could have been I would have been freaking out. Out right you two, probably, you know, that's interesting. Right? We isolated pretty well. Like I mean, I wore a man I grab the mask before I even got on the plane because I just instinctually like just having you know friends that are that are, you know going to Taiwan and going to Japan like you just see the mask like, okay, I'm probably just gonna wear the mask and so this was pre awareness of covid.


Well, no, that was what was happening. But now you didn't connect the dots. You didn't think you had I asked the got doctor when I got to New Zealand do you think this is Over he's like, did you have a fever Mike? I don't remember if I had a fever will then you didn't have coat. You don't have. Koban. Okay, Doc is cocky sometimes. Yeah, so I've got through that we did this I was able to do the show. I didn't close my throat down enough to I kept would have to cancel then the next shows were going to be in the Northwest hard was it to sing? It was not it was not fun. It was not fun. We had to kind of adjust the set around a little bit. Don't put the hard ones in I got the Hawaii to go train with Luiz and some of the guys there Chad was a Muay Thai instructor and I'm starting to do the moist and I'm like dude this hurts.


Like I've never my hands have never hurt this bad of I thought maybe I sprained them because right after I recovered a New Zealand went trained in New Zealand thinking which little fucking gut it out, you know gonna go walk it off rub some dirt on it and like it and I felt okay then When I got to when I finally got to Maui, I'm like this is not right this hurts. I can't fucking do this. I thought well, maybe I sprained my wrist so months go by that and they're not healing I'm going through Harvest at this point and like nothing's like they're not healing up. She's playing Harvest your Winery a so getting into the grapes, but I finally went to a doctor arthritis arthritis doctor and he was like, okay, so walk me through when you first saw the Dead Tada and I started walking them through everything it goes you had covid and what some of the side effects that you find are the are that it, you know inflammation.


So whatever I guess so it's some kind of a rheumatoid response that alone would be well maybe I'm just 56 and I have arthritis but my blood work was completely clean everywhere else. No other issues anywhere else in my body, but just the wrists explaining that but I still have to cough. So whatever cough I had whatever. If I got a New Zealand like every other day, I'll have a coughing fit for you know for 10 minutes man coughing up stuff. So I have lung damage from from it's still still. Yeah still every other day now. Yeah. Now when you train is your cardio diminished. Yeah, how much enough to wear and it's just my mom, you know a my motivations diminish because I'm like trying to do stuff and my hands hurt still not anymore.


Now time now that I'm on Medication what medication did we met the Methotrexate or on meth meth? I'm smoking meth to get through it. You look great. Thank you. I'll always heads you get sketchy at season much easier to push that like second helping away now, right? No appetite but no Methotrexate, which is not as not fun to be on but my wrists have cleared up. I can now I'm back to you know doing stuff. What is methotrexate? Emily it's like a it's for rheumatoid arthritis, but I saw it's basically a chemotherapy. Hello. Yeah. Have you tried CBD CBD now?


Have you tried CBD without the methow truck? So lead stuff? No. No because that a lot of them that's attracts a goes for about it's like a you know, I did I've done it for now 10 weeks. I have another five weeks supposedly I'm going to do but I'm going to continue the CBD after that what how much CBD or taking the day drop a dropper? Just one. Yeah, I'm taking I take a thousand milligrams a day. So it's a high dose but I find how big is that? It's a lot of droppers. Okay, depends on how I use CBD MD and I forget I think it's the Thirteen hundred milligram dropper. I forget how many droppers I have to do it to hit a thousand a day.


But okay that seems to be the magic number where I have it's kind of like turf toe. It's from kicking. I have some some pretty intense pain sometimes in my big toe particularly after a hard heavy bag workout like yesterday. I had a pretty bad. Okay, but man, I'll take the CBD and now today like I'm bending my toe right now on the ground is no pain at all. Okay, and it's it's amazing. I fucking love it. Okay. I love it for so many. I love it for anxiety. I love it just for for relaxation, but I really love it. For joint pain, I think CBD is just I can't sing its Praises enough.


I've had so many friends that have had like real joint problems, like real pain. And then the CBD just completely takes it away. I've her friends dog. The dog was having a really hard time walking like walk with a limp. He gives the dog CBD in like two hours later the dogs like up and moving around and he's like, this is crazy listening to chicken Sean records getting high. Just chilling. Dave Foley had pretty bad arthritis. His hands of the point where couldn't straighten his fingers out that on CBD and now is hands are just mobile again. All right. Yeah stuff's legit. Just that and adjusting the diet or the two main things. That's what I noticed this fires up when I like I have more than a glass of wine and some gluten in the in the dinner.


Yeah, then it flares up. So there's can it's connected goddamn gluten. There's something about it the view but you your restaurant you use Heirloom pasta dough don't you use your we were I mean, it's 50/50. It's commercial flower with because we're finding that it's not holding up like your expect pasta to hold up. Hmm and what way and of the texture? Yeah just texture doesn't hold so we're bluing a blend of the heirloom along with commercial. That's interesting. It doesn't hold up we could but in Italy they use the heirloom wheat, right? Mmm. No, not necessarily. No really getting a lot of Arizona. There's a lot of Arizona wheat in the stuff. It from Italy really because the commodity that hard winter wheat that we grow is a great blender in because they bring all the wheat they get together and they sent it to Italy they blend it they pick their mix and they blend it.


So they actually sell our wheat back to us and the form of great Italian flour, but it's actually grown in the United States. That's interesting when I go over there, even though he passed almost every day when I used to be able to go over there. I didn't get bloated right if I eat pasta here, I just get sick. Well, there's so many other little things that are going on around it. It's so you're probably over there, you know foremost for the average traveler. You're in a foreign country. It's magical you're walking around more your you know, there's lots of stairs you're eating dinner probably earlier in the day or whatever, but you're still walking around your activity.


Your activities are increased and the wind you're having or probably nicer quality wines. So all that stuff ends up being a better. Berries for you, so your body is not reacting. Hmm way over here. You're like, yeah, maybe I won't go for the walk. Maybe I'll drink more than I should I like what you're saying. But no got me. All right over here. I work out like a fucking terrorist and over there. I barely work out at all. I'm getting hammered every day. I'm he's eating until I literally can't stick another ravioli in my face. No, that's not what's going on. I don't know what's going on. I'm definitely walking around quite a bit, you know, but I work at a minimum just always doing something here.


Yeah, I don't so and you know, I don't know. I don't know what the difference is honestly because I'd always thought it was an heirloom wheat and that gives a type of wheat, you would know this. What is the 0 0 like what is it tip of zero people zero zero, so it's on the bag at as she says Tipo T IPO and then a 0 0 and that's a very fine ground. Why? Flower and you're normally for passage you're blending that with semolina flour. So it's usually about a two-thirds to one-third ratio. And Semolina is the Arizona Hardy. No, no simile is just another another version of what you know, what you're you're putting in that pasta to make those gluten stick together.


And so that's the give it like a bite so it's yeah chew to it. Yeah. Hmm, because there's a I don't remember the brand but I buy this particular spaghetti. That's just goddamn delicious. It's from Italy and it's that 0 0 okay flower and it's just such a good pasta and that has a better effect on me than if I buy like standard American brand will pop you know that if yeah, so if you're if you're buying dry pasta in the states and making your your food out of the dry pasta mmm, you probably have a lot better results. If you actually made your own fresh flour pasta for sure, right?


Yeah. Yeah, fresh pie. Pasta is shit. There's it's such a different taste, right? Yeah, like pastas of I like pasta period but fresh pasta, like have you ever been to Felix in Venice? No good Lord. Next time you're there. I brought you stuff which bring hydrangea stuff which bring Felix in Venice starts. He must go to restaurant. We're going to get to this other one on a minute, but shout out to remember Janet, you know heard me talk about Todd fuck talks. Yes, he just wrote this is another book. He just wrote. For it's like personal protection family production book. Awesome. We'll get to that in a minute. Okay, but I brought you some prepared.


Yeah, you don't fuck around you have T-shirts. Yeah, it looks that looks like a cooler. Is that a cooler? Yeah, this is your cooler. These are your t-shirts but I brought you our olives olives couple of cup of wine glasses. I realize that this studio we don't have your tarantula hawk. That's at the old Studio. We must bring it back. I'm not leaving we will have Italy. Do not worry. What is this? What are these beverages cider? Is this alcoholic? Yep, you're right. I know it's November. So sparkling cider sparkling need sparkling white wine sparkling Mead. Is it made with honey? Yeah. Whoa, I've never had that now you will what is that?


Like I was read about that in the Conan books. It's good. It's great. It makes you want to in a crush your enemies, you know as you in the Muse see them driven. Before you hear the Lamentations of the women the women. Yeah. Now these things that you are making yeah, these are all these are poster for wine Plus 4y have you when did you start doing that beers and couple of you needs year and a half ago. Really? Yeah. What was the motivation behind that? I mean you were no, I'm just kidding up when you're fucking wine convenience to restaurants and your music and your three bands and you're right with Jesus. I got bored. So I decided to take it up a notch.


You're you're looking at work or home front. Yeah, so that's for you. Thank you very much of it over here for you somewhere else. I will send a photograph when I'm drinking it on November 1st because this is for your marijuana cigarettes. Dude, you won't be able to fit your bongs your Bongs in here use the bongs anymore. The bong bong bong won't fit. That's a dope box. But this is this is for your marijuana cigarettes. Are your your mushrooms as it were that's a legit lunch box. Yeah, I had a lunch bot. My last lunch box. I had was in the seventh grade eighth grade 7th grader 8th grade. I moved to a bad neighborhood. And I realize you can't wear lunch.


You can't bring lunch boxes to school or kids get very upset with you. So this is this is for you as well. This is Todd's new book protection form from humanity and I'll let you read up on that order from yeah, so he's the one that got me into doing the muy Thai stuff and now for his book, he's actually this is kind of his promotional item. He's doing with the book is fucking gloves. He's making his own gloves. Yeah, he's having I'm having them made. I'm sure but makes these for him. I don't know find out. Nice, you like this. Yeah. Now you've only been doing more time for how long now not even a year and no problems with the hip because you know that I mean there's a there's a weird shift that happens in the hip.


I got one of those little Hammer thingies to you know, they little electric massager things. Yeah, so that's weird. No, those are good. There are guns. Yeah. So yeah. So what happens if I go a little too far what's happening is my Hip joint kind of just shifts forward a little bit and starts pinching something and I'll just stand on my left foot use that hammer car on the hip done. We're fine thank robot. Get back to work. So kind of a cyborg now kind of a cyborg little bit now. Does that give you a full hip replacement or is it just roll surfacing full hip? Wow. Yeah. What is the what John Wayne par? Just got a hip resurfacing and there's videos of him.


12 weeks after surgery kicking the pads. Now for they were telling me like I can't remember specifically but I want to say it was three months before I actually got back on the mats. They're like, you're not going to want to do that for six months, but you can probably start getting back and doing some things in three months. That's what weeks and of course nine weeks. You've got to get home Lilia cheating when I get out there and do stuff. So yeah, so you slowly moved around a little bit Yeah, if you drink just some bit some basic position will drills and just doing that kind of stuff you're fine, but do you know sparring? You know, then your heavy loads and you being a dumbass. Yeah. It's um, it's the one where they they hack off the top of the hip bone.


They put a fake top and then they screw it deep in the bone. And that kind of has to stay with you forever. Yep, because they can't really do that again, right? That's it. Yeah like son, but I have a weapon. So if something happens as long as I can balance on one foot you pull that up, but I can pull this thing out. It's like a big blade in the middle. Of my bone and I can jam it into your juggler. Right? Look at those canes that turn into a sword. Yes. We're umbrellas don't recommend the the pain that you must have been in to agree to do that how to be pretty goddamn sister. Yeah. Well, the guy said like and it was a lot of stomping on stage that don't like pretty much damage my right hip not my left because I did a lot of stopping with my right foot.


Did you feel pain while you're stomping know it was like, you know years late that's like, you know decade or more of doing that and then I just thought that I was being a wimp that I wasn't healing or was didn't push through it or whatever. I wasn't working out enough but the claim they actually got in there like dude you have like a Gobstopper for a hip. So you're it's there's no padding. There's nothing it's it looks it's like a mangled so kapamas all of the gone. Yeah gone. It was just like All the cartilage chewed-up, duh. Yeah, so there was no possibility of Hope for stem cells or know they were like the like don't they just take that off the table?


It was real. So it was like that was you've had this like this for seven years it minimum about a damaged it was on the on the on the ball joint. They were like, this is we're not we're surprised you weren't in here sooner. Really? Yeah, and we limping at all when you're walking. Yeah, you know, it was just all of a sudden fire off and I couldn't remember you saying you were doing And you couldn't move your hip right and you thought like yeah like a hip impingement or something. No, it was just that was the I didn't have a hip. Yeah good times Michael Bisping just got both of his knees replaced. Ouch. He's like 43, I believe. Yeah, I don't think he's much older than that, but he said some some monsters kicking them.


So there's that but it's also running he runs a lot. Okay. Yeah. I ran in high school quite a few runs on the concrete, I believe now. Don't worry runs, but I know he's got a love of running they have Concrete in a lot of places so it could be anywhere could be could be anywhere else. Yes, but you know when you see a guy who's in his early 40s getting his knees completely replaced. Yeah, that's terrifying. So what do you think went on with is there something similar with bone structure and and those kind of Replacements that happen with Silva's Anderson Silva's Shin with it just like no. Just batters checked like what when Weidman checked it.


He most likely cracked it on the first one and then the second one. He threw it again and just snapped in half because but I mean after so after he healed and they went back out and he started having some leg problems and like a year later, even though was healed like it was just wasn't healed enough or it takes a long time to heal a fracture like that. When a bone snaps in half you remember Frank Mir when Frank Miller got hit by a car. He was on his motorcycle to get hit by a car. He was not the same for years. He tried to fight again. I think it was like a year and a half-ish later after the accident. He wasn't the same it took it took quite a long time for the old frank and maybe you know, you'd have to ask him maybe never really was the same again, but just something about leg bones when they snap first of all you got to think you can't put any weight on them for a long time.


So you got all this atrophy. So all the tissue around it atrophies and that's got to rebuild so you got to rebuild that while you're also trying to Sure that the bone is fully recovered. And while you're pushing it, who knows what kind of damage you're going to do to the tendons and the ligaments and you know, it takes a long time unless you're doing some shit unless you're on some steroids. It takes a long time to build that muscle back up as well. So there's a lot going on there which is in a way. It's the not the opposite but for the hip replacement they had us walking like within an hour, but just to make sure you have soon as you walk wake up. Have you walking you? That is a weird, but it Graham Hancock was in here not here the other place six weeks after hip replacement.


He was walking around and I was like that is you're walking like normal. This is crazy. Yeah, they just make sure you start walking to make sure that that you minimize the amount of atrophy. Yeah. He I know Anderson got his knee blown out. I think it was Jared cannoneer. Not fight. Yeah, but cannoneer hit so fucking are there could have happened at any point in time in his career, you know. All right. It's amazing more guys don't have their knees blown out by leg kicks, you know, you know now doing more time if someone kicks your leg like, I'm sure I know Anthony hard on go over it that guy's terrifying faces. Do we got we got video of like some do going seriously.


Just just kick my leg. I want to see what this is all about. Nancy's like you don't want that. Seriously. Can I like kick it like guy crying? He's on the ground crying and he's and he's like you I can ask me to do that what you is so big hard-on. Was big for a heavyweight. Yeah fucking Dutchman. Yeah conch. Yeah, those those those shins to the thigh. It's it's one of the most underrated pains. Yeah terrifying to ask you guys to do that. So and I you know, I'm Anakin I'm gonna pursue that a little bit just I'm not gonna ever use it for anything, but I just like I just like that next level of awareness of striking awareness.


Yeah, but the one I haven't done as I haven't gotten with an instructor to go just teach me how to not get hit like just that just that awareness of seeing what's coming and under starting to understand the sequence of events that are going to lead up to that strike. Then you have a course in the UFC of unconventional Strikers that are going to come at you from angles. You didn't write fact, but in general just and not really because I want to get in a fight just because I want to have that extra part of my brain exercised to under just to Action Reaction. I know it's funny like if you say I want to learn how to play piano. Someone doesn't say. What are you going to play in concerts? They don't say that but if you say I want to learn more tired. Oh you gonna fight? Yeah 7:00 tomorrow like to learn.


It's a skill. Yeah. It's like, you know, I'd like to learn how to do a back handspring. I'd like to learn how to do a lot of things right just seems like a cool thing to learn but that's one of those things if you if you even say you want to learn it people like right? Why do you want to learn that? What are you going to fight people write like know? It's an interesting thing for the Vols. It's cool, right, you know, and it's an interesting. In to know but so your coach doesn't work with you on but really I don't really have a coach don't at the moment because it was just Todd was kind of he and I were the ones going around the world and training with insane instructors really good really good coaches. So you get oh so he's a practitioner but he's not a coach Todd's a black and a black belt under hood Rigo Vig for Brazilian Jiu Jitsu, but he and I caught the he got the bug before I got the bug.


I want to keep he cut he made me catch the a bug so, you know with his connections traveling all the time as he did he would have insane instructors. And then since this instructor would introduce you to that instructor when you go into that town, so we had great. It was really cool to meet these people, but the problem that I was having was, you know, when you're trying to have Carlos Condit teach you how to do something. He's like four feet taller than I am and like it doesn't what he's does isn't necessarily going to translate. To me so you can see him struggling to go. How do I explain this to you as a midget? Like how do you know how to how to make this work for you?


Because it works for me because I have length and I have an entire history of being you know, what a lot of the ties are very short, you know. Yeah, so that's why I love when you get to like some place like New Zealand. It has short people beaten fuckers up. It's great. So, you know, they're in there my height so I got a lot more out of that stuff in in Leah New Zealand, have you been to Thailand? No, I have not yet been that would be a move once everything opens up go there and do some training there. There's a lot of people that go to Phuket because they have it set up where you know, you could stay there you could train there and one of my business managers went there. He spent six days there just just doing nothing but training just enjoying it because going there and working out with like real Thai coaches everyday guys, barely speak English.


Yeah, they've had three hundred fights and I'll show you how to do it. Everything old school tie classic moist and just I think we did that in Copenhagen. We went to an awesome gym there this guy barely spoke English, but he's he was he could still instruct you because you know, he's pointing and grunting. Yeah. Well, they're also you mirror, you know, you see how they do it, you know, they'll say look look look and then they'll do it in like, okay, right, but you feel so dumb when you when you watch someone who's like really good at my tie like this. It's so effortless, you know, the the It's So Graceful, So it's a really interesting art form, you know because there's really only a few kicks like they just got it down to mostly roundhouse kicks a couple of Sidekicks teeps, you know front kicks.


And that's about it. Everything else is like they must are going to do a cartwheel kick or some Sanchez shit. They're learning that from other people are just playing around and having fun, but the art itself when it comes down to the kicking butt because they have that they've got it down like this. Goodness, and if the efficiency it apart that's really eluded me. Is that because I don't have enough hours in doing it. I don't really have the like, you know French had the liaison of this words kind of slides into that that transition of understanding you're not going you can't throw that kick because you didn't do the thing before that set you up in the position to be in a position to throw that kick, right? So that kind of stuff is very interesting and complicated and in a way it kind of just I stop I'm like, I'm in my head too much.


On look at wait a minute. I was acquitted. It's like a vocabulary if you talk to someone who's very articulate. They have a lot of words their disposal. They have a lot of and a deep understanding of how the language Works. Whereas if you talk to a child they can say some things but it's kind of crude and that's how most people are when it comes to martial arts. You're in the beginning in particular. You're basically like a child. Yeah crude clumsy with your words. Whereas you talk to a Master, you know. Like a bullock our something like that. Like there's the fluency the fluidity the efficiency of the movements. It's just such a beautiful thing to watch. Yeah always in the right position, you know, like one of my favorites for sure if you ever watch Giorgio petrosyan fight no, oh my God, you gotta watch that guy fight he is I may have dark sides always it was always sending me videos of dude, you gotta watch this guy fight.


So he most likely has sent me videos of Petrosian at one point in time when he was 20. Three I think was forty three in a row and like some 35 Knockouts or something like that. But I was 23 built beaten a shitload of world Muay Thai Champions. And if you have a UFC Fight Pass UFC Fight Pass is great because it has not just UFC fights but it has a shitload of other promotions including it's showtime. It's showtime goes way back to like the early 2000s like 20 years ago, and it's show time. Was the precursor to Glory? Okay.


Hey and glory is like the premier kickboxing that of today, right? So petrosyan, I think still fights for Glory but petrosyan when he was in his twenties. You could catch those on UFC Fight Pass. I just was watching it yesterday in the gym was watching him when he was 23 and it's probably like probably deep in his 30s. Now I think is probably 37 or something like that, but he's been around forever and he is just one of the smoothest most elegant fighters to watch but ruthlessly effective but his technique is just perfect. He's always in a perfect position and he's a guy if you watched him train constantly drilling just drill drill drill over and over and over again, and you know, they do situational drills and positional drills and so his footwork and everything is all set.


Nature like when the guy comes to him. He steps aside left hook right? Kick and like all these techniques that that flow together. So perfectly in a match you can watch them rehearse them over and don't miss a ton of videos of on YouTube and watch him watch him train. But okay the calm the doctor because like literally like he it's like he's doing something different than all these other guys are doing and when you talking like world champions news KO in them when he was in his early 20s while to watch Ouch, just because it's like what is he doing different? Like it's hard to see like if you watch Mike Tyson in his prime. It's pretty obvious what he's doing different, you know and watch Roy Jones jr.


In his prime pretty obvious faster than everybody ridiculous left hook. You're seeing it all with Giorgio. It's like, how is he able to do this these guys like his understanding of position of when to be there when to not be there. It's just second to none. So and I so, you know, The transition we're talking to you know, that's kind of the part that's always eluded even even when you just see like those in between your when you're kind of lose the fight like yeah that the match kind of lose it so we get we ended up here. So, um Ortega this last fight didn't take it did I felt like the thing that really was like surprising to me was not necessarily that he's like, oh now you've trained striking and you're doing really well at the Striking it was like those in between things that he was doing that I was like, yes.


Never I haven't seen that in most UFC fighters, like just that in-between thing that he put the glue together to you wasn't leaving any holes. There's no holes. No holes. Yeah, it was brilliant and was a masterful performance. Yeah, because that guy that Korean zombie Chan sung Jung is very he's dangerous. Yeah, every dangerous and Brian neutralize them. He neutralized everything and he looks so smooth and professional like everything he was doing look so good and cream. Zombie said he he doesn't remember anything of the last three rounds doesn't remember them because remember he got hit with that back Spong although yeah. Yeah, he got ko'd and apparently he was just on autopilot for the rest of the fight doesn't remember.


He says very embarrassed doesn't even remember the fight. Wow. Yeah that happens. Sometimes guys get kayode and they'll go back to their corner of the like, is it the sac around it's the fifth round and like it is. Yeah. It's the fifth round. Come on, man. You're losing the fight. Like I am right. I thought it just started like they literally don't remember fights and Is there they are literally can cause he got bonked while they're inside the ring. Luckily. There's no, you know when we're doing shows. I'm not getting bonked. So if you lose track of the show, you don't know what song you're on is that happen. That's actually a good thing because you're like you're in you're in the zone right there actually, like you've kind of disappeared into that story you wrote you no longer thinking about the story you wrote.


You're just you're now just delivering the story unconsciously but consciously or exhibiting that poster for lunch box. We got some of that good shit. Marijuana cigarette. Whoa, that will do it. There's been many a show where I'm in the middle of a bit going. What bit is this? Yeah. You generally just takes a second ago. Oh, yeah airplane airplane. Yeah. Keep talking keep talking you're good. But the this shows that you do have you ever been in a situation where you're in the middle of a song and you are you're so in the groove that you kind of forget what song it is don't know where I am. Definitely. Yeah you because you're so in it. The middle of it but then you make that mistake of thinking about it.


They're having a memory of like, oh like a week ago. I fucked the song up and as soon as you have that thought you're like mmm interesting about live performances. Yeah. Well, that's kind of why you know, that's kind of why you do those. Yeah buts. So this thing we got coming up is not it's a we already recorded it. We filmed it at ARC Asante and what? Marcus onto our croissant is a is this insane? Concrete Village? That was to get his name wrong. Uh Paolo soleri look that up buddy Paolo.


Soleri a Paolo. He's he was a student of flat growth of Frank Lloyd Wright. So he built his Foundry in the middle of the desert on your way up to Flagstaff from Phoenix. It's kind of off the In and it's for what purpose for bells they make these kind of bell structures and they make you know, so there's a kind of a school to you can go attend to understand how to do Foundry work but also concrete just understanding these concrete structures and so it's houses all these locations and there's there's kind of a school there. There's there's people who come come through and travel so Larry is there an image of this place yet look up.


Arcosanti, I got a our CEO Arcos is a and sa NT I How did you find out about this place? It's right near my house. It's like an hour away. How fucking cool is that spot? Holy shit, man. Yeah, so it's all concrete. Yeah fuck so, you know, it's good there the added pressure like when you're playing live, it's just a live show, there's pressure because you know, you're playing live, but there's not a lot of pressure because when it goes by you the next song that worried about it, but when you're playing live in front of a camera, and it's going to I'm sure you fucking up that's a lot of pressure.


So we filmed a couple like two weeks ago. We filmed the entire album. We did all the songs in these in these structures. And did you have an outdoor audience is that no, it was no loss no audience for because we had to do what we're doing it like mostly at night like early Rising late Rising. It was quite it was not easy to do especially in a this thing supposed to be kind of this integrated with the natural terrain, so, You've got you've got rattlesnakes and some coyotes shit everywhere. Like it's your living in the desert. Your 360 views are the Wilderness the hostel and environment. So and no audience and then your sail and no audience is singing so but it's also hot.


It's also cold. It's also like your there's like there's black widows and you know, so your, you know, your it's kind of a not an easy thing to do, especially when you're trying to catch the sunrise and you want the song to land right on as the sun's coming up over the years and like all those kind of things. Things that that and it's like fucking 6 a.m. Yeah fuck so you were recording as the sun was coming up trying yeah on song one song but like then the you're trying to catch other things with the Stars on the other songs, and it's all timing and you know, am I going to get bit dude that sounds amazing fucking tired and I'm just suck while you were doing that and getting up but the overall product.


Yeah, I'm pretty I'm pretty stoked about it. And that's so that's what we're doing. Is that It's a that's that's streaming on the same day that the album comes out on the 30th. And what's it streaming on? I don't know what the actual service is it is but it's post up her live.com is where you go to get a ticket to see it and I think it's the same one that did I want to say it's the it's the same service that mr. Bungle is doing I think mr. Bungle shows the day after ours. So it's the same service and I don't know but it's available on the puss for website. No, it's pussy for live.com. It's a separate website. Is there a link to it on Puscifer.com? There should be on the main page, but if you just go to Puscifer so server live.com that's for that takes you there was for performing the new album in its entirety from Arcosanti in the Arizona desert dude.


That is such a great idea. I love it. Well, you know just hold lockdown thing not being able to tour. This is our tour. This is it so mmm. Yeah, it's been a weird one. Right and the fact that everybody was like, oh, you know around June will probably be fine. Not either. It is November almost and I think the big thing like, you know kind of circling back is I'm still feeling residual effects of that thing and I feel like there's a bunch of people that that maybe all my didn't almost die. I have friends who almost died. Yeah. It was what was ugly? So and then you have people going you guys are apparently I'm being paid to say this eat a dick, dude. Oh you can't Sentinels people those people think that five G's killing babies people are out of their fucking minds.


There's so much noise out there. It's so hard. It's so hard to pay attention. It's so hard to try to separate. I have two friends that came real close to dying and then I have other friends that shook it off. Like it was nothing. I have a couple of friends who didn't even know they had it they tested positive. They said I didn't feel a thing. Jamie was sick for a day. And here I Vincent was Ragweed. Yeah. Yeah, but my friend Michael yo, he came really close. He was in the hospital for quite a long time and my friend. Dr. Neil Riordan. He was in the hospital. It came very close to death a couple times and he you know, I think folks that got it early on before they knew how to treat it correctly.


And what was going on and what do we got their asses handed to them? Yeah. Sure the our friend Dean his family and I'm going to get this wrong. So I'm sure Dean's gonna light me up but I think his wife tested positive the kids. Is it positive he tested positive for think the parents tested positive? Then nobody showed any symptoms. He showed symptoms on a Tuesday finally got into the hospital almost died on a Sunday then recovered quickly after because he's in shape. He's like mid 40s. He does. He's a runner like he's not out of shape. But like there was a touch-and-go moment where he couldn't speak to you couldn't talk to on Sunday like that. So I'll Tuesday showed symptoms, you know, not fucking cool at all on a Sunday and then came out of it.


So meanwhile Fatso Trump Years old eating french fries kicks it in the weekend back on the campaign Trail looks a hundred times better than Biden. They got him on steroids and adderal. He lives great. It looks great. I'm thinking about trying out a roll now. Yeah. He looks so good. It's amazing as I'm give a speech other day. I'm like, the guy has never looked better like covid like literally like he had a hermetic effect. Yeah and his body that's the stronger because of covid it's still a dish. Bag, oh, yeah, probably more. Yeah, cause now he thinks he's immune cocky don't have to worry anymore. Yeah, you know now you can go just people spit in his mouth, please and he's fine.


It's all so weird. Please do if the world doesn't seem real. You know, it just it seems like you have to remind yourself. Okay, this is still real. This is the world. Yeah, you know, but I think that's kind of what you know, you had those good you had those good ants those good uncles Good friends, when you were a kid that you kind of learn there's a lot of influence you get from your parents. I've my dad is is you know, my whole world as far as influence a good influence on decision-making right? But you also have those people around you that you should have around you if they're positive that it's should be fairly easy to see right through bullshit and get to the core of a good decision shit.


Yeah. It should it should but now with this fucking thing the phone it's just It's it's very strange to take to the information you're getting to make that decision has been picked apart and it's all dopamine dump. Yeah charged so you can't really it's sensationalized conversation start with an argument. Mmm. I really like I really like Frosted Flakes and if you don't like Frosted Flakes, fuck, you must be racist. Yeah. You must be racist be a big. Yeah. I had a Alan the This on the podcast and he had a really he's actually working on a book about this now, but it was a series of tweets that he put up about what we're dealing with was social media is the same thing that we're dealing with with processed food processed food with all these preservatives it fills you up.


It's terrible for you. He's like this is processed information. This is not how human beings are supposed to process exchange information and not supposed to get it in this 280 character form should be a face. Specialist process you go through to digest and yeah Nation. Well, it should be people are supposed to talk like this supposed to this one of the things that people love about podcasting. It is a digital thing and you're getting it and it's kind of impersonal in a way but it's also kind of personal because you and I are having a personal moment and it's recorded like we're in front of each other we're looking at each other and this is how people are supposed and were nice to each other. And yeah, and you say something I consider it we talk and you get in You'll time to exchange information back and forth and and see how the other person responds to it.


And then respond to their response. That's how people are supposed to talk man. And this Twitter thing that people are doing all the most mentally ill people. I know spend the most time on Twitter and there are there on it ranting and raving and blaming all these other people for their unhappiness and it's it's so weird to see it's so it's like you're watching people self their self-inflicting. As with Venom. Yeah, that's why I kind of like what's you know, one of the things that I noticed when I got into the wine industry is that you have all these different walks of life various political bants various religious bentz, you know just various cultures all kind of coming together in this thing, and I don't I don't have in my circle of people.


I don't I can talk we can all talk to each other and all of those all of those cultures are represented all those political beliefs all is religious beliefs. All those things are all represented in all the people that we deal with and we have these civil conversations with each other face-to-face. We're all busting our asses. We're all doing a thing. There's a puzzle. We're trying to solve there's a problem we've encountered that. I don't know how to solve and you know how to solve it. I'm trying to build this thing and you're very good at building this thing. We're solving puzzles and you have a core Common Ground. Yeah. Yeah. We have a core Common Ground from just just from life. We're just we're making a living. You have a living and we're just talking we're talking why was felt soon as you go here. And when you're on animus it turns into this fucking ugly fight of polarized mass of like you have to pick a side and it's like yeah, you're on the wrong side.


I'm standing like there's the only thing we're really kind of massaging and trying to work around and picking a side on his weather is Mother Nature. You're just trying to she smacks the shit out of you and you're trying to fucking I hate it. And so that she's in charge and you are not in charge. And so that's the thing about having a common having a common thing that you do like Jiu-Jitsu like if you train Jiu-Jitsu you're going to have Republicans and Democrats and progressives and and Libertarians. They're all going to be training together and you know, they'll laugh and smile a disagreements they have because the agreement they have is that Jiu-Jitsu is awesome, right?


So they're in there try to choke each other and And then show stuff is like I can choke if I don't agree with you. I can just disappear but then I get to choke you but it's just it's not as important as the Jiu-Jitsu, you know, it's like all right, somewhere along the line it became a like you have to be on my side or fuck you and that these ideological Echo bubbles that people use chambers that people get into it's just it's never before happened where you've had people that can so readily find people that agree with them wholeheartedly and and have full confirmation bias. Like only only people that are on this side and this that believe these things and this core group and it's real obvious like it's real cut-and-dry what they believe and what they want what they see and what they don't and then it's reinforced by CNN and MSNBC and Fox News and You know all these biased news sources said if there is a Division, I guess that I would make it would be fundamentalism versus fucking chill out ISM laughter.


No, it's because you know people are so your far left in your far right or bumping each other's asses on the other side of the circle. They're the same. They're there. They're all one fucking stroke away from handmaid's tale and they are burning books together. Yes telling you what pronouns to use What religion you're supposed to pick and write all this stuff? It's they're the same person. They're the same people and we're in the middle of gone. I I just want some pasta is super simple super similar and it's all coming together with this pandemic because people are being forced to be locked away your locking away. You're staying away from people. So you have less interaction.


Let's see actual real contact with people more digital contact more processed bullshit way of communicating with people and then there's the fear. fear and then there's the lack of money because everybody's out of work and then there's all this Panic that comes with that and this anger and anxiety and Existential angst of the disease itself and the combination of all these factors together with a fucking douchebag for a president chaos, and and no good choices for opponents, you know, everybody's just voting the people that are not voting for Trump. They're just voting for not Trump. They're not voting for Joe Biden like no one's super excited about Joe Biden they're voting for not Trump.


So you sitting there like if you're an observer watching this like we gotta get out of here like this. This is gonna blow. Okay, I think you know, You start to default back to the position of okay. Well what this I'm just to step back and just see in my lifetime. What haven't we seen? Okay. Well in my lifetime, we haven't seen a female black president. So if you're voting for Biden in a way, you have to be a little honest about it. You're actually voting for Kamala Harris because it's very possible. She's going to be the next president possible Right hundred percent, but is she an awful person? Is she a bad? And she'd good person. I don't know. I just know that it's a step forward.


It's something that hasn't happened before me and I get to be alive when we've when we have a female president. Well, I've never had a Nazi president either early step is step forward. Well, we already have that. Oh, I think he's a Nazi. It's kind of Jewish son-in-law son-in-law though is the Antichrist you've ever seen him next to Damien. Have you ever seen? That's great from the Go we've done it multiple times. Come on, but it up there him and Damien from the movie Damien The Omen look at the two of them together you are. Oh there is he's the Antichrist. Yeah. Yeah, so it's not like the devil Sons devil son-in-law selected sample son-in-law God's what it is.


I like it or maybe he's the devil son and right Trump son-in-law. Yeah, maybe he's got like there's a he's got the handle maybe drum nice guy with great hair and a beautiful suit and you're just making it. Yeah, maybe it just got really good bone structure, and I'm jealous. Alice could be that I'm a beautiful wife that happens to be Trump's daughter. Maybe that maybe I'm just a bitch could be that but so I see a photo of you got a picture of them. Look at the two of them side next to each other Damien The Omen The Omen God. Damn it Brian. Yeah, you're not that young. You should know. What the fuck dude. How old are you man? You should fucking know who the omen is, bro.


Oh, yeah. Look at RIT that the V photo / yeah, just say that's some yes. I come on son. He's actually right now not looking at the camera. He's talking to the Wolves across the fence High and the other side. He's just gonna make an eye contact. Yeah. Yeah. I'm delivering a message that literally is straight out of the omen. Yeah, Damien The Omen Jared Kushner Google those two things together and go to images. I've seen it. We've folded up multiple times on this podcast. It's 100% Is that accurate Jared Cushman? It watch this.


His book Cushman images. There you go. You're going to do their images. Watch this. Nope. Who's that guy? Yeah, he's saying there. Is it Kushner right? We're oh yeah here there's got to be an image of right there where down? Oh, yeah it down the bottom. Yeah. Look Come On Son. I mean, that's an omen that's him. That is him now go back to the images again. And there's one with him. It's like a portrait mode with up that right. We're right above that one right above that one yet. Click on that. So look at Trump is blurry.


Look at him. Definitely. He's got his hand right up. His puppet ass is like making him say the statement thing. We are so close. So close so close to the final confrontation. Let's just again, maybe I'm just being a bitch or just some goats blood on Amazon's really handsome man with a slender neck. Beautiful wife. I know she just shut the fuck up. Maybe maybe it's me man. It's probably you probably you. No matter who gets in that office that get skewered. Yeah, I was interested to see how what they say about Bernie. I was really hoping we could see what would happen if that guy would get in place. That was that was interesting to me what would happen if somebody got in places that you know, what we're going to make college free.


We're gonna completely absolve you of student debt. We're going to make Medicare for all we're going to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour all those things that I'm not an economist. Maybe it wouldn't have worked but I was interested to see I'm like that seems like to be a Use of taxpayer money. I give you going to use taxpayer money and most of them are using it for well the problem now it is if you want if you want to know that scenario, you don't have anybody who's going to go? Okay, let's honestly look at it and we're going to present the case for 4 against in the middle. Like what the possibilities might be. You don't have anybody that's going to actually be loud enough to tell you the answer that you're that you're yeah.


It was a little yeah, they're like this but as far as actually somebody Barrack breaking it down because if you try to Google that what does that information all the shit's going to be in the way talking about, you know socialism and whatever so you don't know I'm not and I'm not necessarily for Bernie. I'm just saying, I don't know because I can't find the paper that isn't biased to present that argument to me. Well to me, it was pretty shocking that the only people that I was interested at all were blocked out by the system Tulsi gabbard Bernie Sanders Andrew Yang. There's the only I was interested in and they were completely black ball and pushed out by the system that like fuck you sometime.


You know, so Rallo, you know, normally when you're to find something out about a history of a place you kind of follow the money to really sit backwards so follow follow the follow the reason you know, why were they so who's who's blocking them out? And why would they be blocking him out and follow that and follow that breadcrumb trail to see why I just want it to be over. Yeah, and I want civil. War to be here already, so I know how many bullets to buy It's like Tuesday roughly themes like it's coming. Yeah, seems like it's coming but I feel like this is a good place to be first of all, this is a very neutral ground because it's a blue spot in a red state.


It really is. Yeah and a red room. Yeah, Arizona is it seems like it's well and on paper and you never know this the polls don't mean shit, but you know, they're saying Biden's ahead and Arizona. How's that possible? I don't know but like that's a red State because where I'm where I live like that's all day long you've got to do like with the Trump flag driving around on the car and it's like I can we just have a coffee. Can we just talk with? No. Hope for Freedom? It's just this is what a can we talk to me not honking. Yeah, and then you're in a fight because you don't honk like fuck.


You didn't even fucking home for Freedom too. Busy sucking cock, huh? Yeah. Like four-four enslavement I suck cock for enslavement and then do it. Some people are into that. They want you to tie them up. Now. What do you do? It's it's a confusing time too. Because a lot of these states that were red are getting infiltrated by people like me that are abandoning the blue States. They're abandoning California, but taking with them their shitty voting habits. Yeah the like Go to this place with freedom and then just take it all away. And you don't need that many guns until it was what are you gonna do do whatever you want.


That doesn't seem right. We need some regulation. And then yeah it all becomes California. Yeah, that's like, you know, there are things in it is funny the business that I'm in there and the alcohol business. It's almost it's completely contrary to what you would think about the people who like less government less regulation less all those things like The when it comes to wine and and and you know that kind of thing in Arizona, it's the commits very California. They're like they want to control everything you're doing they want to know every move you're making there's all these hoops. You gotta jump through to get things done. It's funny how so in what way justjust in the regulation of alcohol.


They interpret, you know, they're very this Arizona in general. Yeah and specifically yeah for a warrant for the winemaking. There's a lot of Hoops. We have to jump through as winemakers. I must the Texas bro, you can One with a gun that your fuck Fredericksburg right out here man. Not far from here. Yeah, they have great wine. Yeah. Allegedly unless I don't know shit about one. I like I like your wine. Yeah, I don't taste good. You're gonna like more of my one, you know shit. I like her first. I like your wine. I just don't know why I like it. You know, if you seen some progress made with love that to have you seen sour grapes the documentary. No, yes parts of it. Haven't seen the whole I haven't It's pretty amazing.


That's what keeps hearing. It's amazing. Yeah that this guy made fake wine that was supposed to be these really expensive bottles and duped all these like real one Azul Azul. So when I first heard about the film, I was under the impression like that. I sat next to that guy. I was at a I was at a Australian consulate wine dinner in Beverly Hills with Peter guy go from penfold sitting next to me and that guy was sitting now who was that guy's name? Sour grapes sour grapes the documentary man whooping um Ruby and so Jesus he would I met that guy said next to him. I didn't buy any wine from him.


Luckily. But but you know, I met him so initially I was like, you know, fuck that guy for like dipping all these people but the thing that they're they're basically saying was that yeah that aside yeah, he fucked a lot of people up but his ability to do what he was doing to put these wines and oil and mimic what the palette the just the nature of the color everything about and being able to duplicate the what's in the bottle to the point where it would fool Asam. He was like, he's an alchemist like he was really good at like making it healing just like putting wine in the bottle and selling you the bottle like if you opened it and you taste it you thought you really thought it was that wine.


You could go that seems like a that seems like not a great version of that one, but that's that wine. Oh, so you could tell that it was a slightly on in some cases. That's that's you know, try any of us want know. I'm kind of going to try it but there were just saying the guy really was able to get close to mimicking the pallets and structure these wines. So that's why what's the name again? Brian Rudy? Kumoemon. I said Ruby. Curnow on Kearney Camille one Taniya one Rudy cornea one.


Okay, pretty interesting. So how did this guy do this? Like if you know like if it's such a fine art to create a great wine, and I know you I've tried well thing as your drawings, but it what he Doing you know, and I'm just I'm speculating on this. I haven't seen the film but what he was doing was just a fool you right now that wine might not last in that bottle won't see this is not going to it's not going to hold up its not structure. It's not the structure of wine. He was literally putting dirt and things in to create that initial impression so that when you taste it to investigate it you okay. I think that's what that is.


And then he write the check and he's like a bitch. There is a fucking great book that I am in the middle of that. You would love that's based on where you going to read this one next, right? Yeah, so I'll read that one. It's my friend Graham Hancock wrote the forward to it. And then it's a Bryan Burrough rescues book and here we find Gilliam. It's mlibrary here. It's called the immortality key and whoops and it is all about ancient wine and The ancient Greeks how they used they put all kinds of stuff note if you don't mind.


Yeah the immortality key. This is the Other Brian's got a rare and it's a really just listen to the podcast the recent podcast that I did with this guy. It's amazing. He's a scholar of the the Greek Classics in Greek history, and he focused on the What did they call it Lucy? Nian Mysteries? Okay, where they would they have these rituals where they would all lose this and they would all get together and they would have these rituals where they would drink this spiked wine.


And the wine was they've proven now. The wine was spiked with LSD, like components with spiked with ergot and they believe with probably a bunch of other different psychedelics and maybe psilocybin Maybe. But it was wines that had these psychedelic compounds and they would have these incredible rituals and people would go there and this is like literally like the foundation of Western Civilization came from these these rituals and then these rituals were forbidden by the Roman emperors and then they started doing these rituals outside of Greek outside of Greece and they sure do an in Spain and they found it.


Images of them doing it in Italy and they found residue of these substances in pottery and they poke proven that it traveled all over the place. But what was fascinating to me is that their wine was never just wine they would put all sorts of different things in the wine and like wine was in that back then was not just simply grapes that were fermented. They would add cinnamon and honey and all these different things to the want which I thought was really fascinating. Okay? Yeah, but the the fact that it was The source of their psychedelic rituals was wine. All right. I'm going to read that. Yeah, watch the podcast. Okay. It's he's a really great at describing it and it's a very condensed thing and then to further go get into the book.


Did you did you watch the Fantastic fungi film haven't seen that yet. I thought I started watching I was about halfway through this pain. I've been kind of busy Joe but what you have 50 jobs, I would imagine your a little and you have a family you don't know the fuck you do it seems well. My wife is a fucking bad-ass. She's more of a badass than I am and she can she hold the lot of other things down that that I wouldn't be able to do without her. So we have a nice symbiotic energetic relationship. Yeah, if I find someone who is has that many jobs. They almost always have an awesome wife. Yeah. She's amazing. Yeah because I couldn't I could not do any of this show without her. Absolutely. That's a great thing man.


Have a great team like that because when I Could this all the things you do? I'm like restaurants whines. Now you making Mead and then you have from going to Michigan now to like meet with a cup of wine makers there because I'm going to probably put a facility. They're going to my dad's house is there so I'm gonna go as far I'm going to my dad's house what they're trying to kill Michigan. So it's a good place to go right now. They're literally it's the governor is making everything fall apart. Yeah. I'm going to find out somebody's I don't land for like a buck. I'm going to fix it soon. So we're going to go now. I'm gonna make me decider and Italy wind in Michigan's I just had like a friend came back from Michigan to tell me what horror stories, huh? No know where I live. He's okay.


Look at my portion is like, you know 16 Acres of trees, you know deer walking through your yard. I don't talk about I don't know either but just feeding with other people tell me. Well, I do. Yeah pretend you know what you're saying. Yeah. So what part of Michigan upper right on Lake, Michigan? Oh nice. Yeah. Mason County also, that's pretty Rural, right? Yeah. What why did you choose that area? That's where my dad was a teacher. I went I when I lived one - when I left, Ohio and went to live with my dad in Michigan and that's where he was wrestling coach and teacher and Western Michigan. So he built a house.


He and Nick Tatar chick this big motherfucker. He and his sons and my dad built the house that I own now in in Scottsville. Oh wow. So it's that's why I'm going back to check in on the house. Look at these buildings that we've been looking at set up a situation. So I had my friend Tim whites with me in the car nice my wine making partner. So we're gonna we're just exploring a building. I'm going to talk to some Growers. There's definitely cider there. I mean, there's apples everywhere and I can make mead tomorrow because you can get honey. What keeps you motivated to constantly do an like these new projects another Just like this puzzles.


I just fucking love puzzles. Like, you know physical large-scale sculptural and big space puzzles. So you think of like almost like constructing a new business or a warehouse or factory like this or creation of like like an art piece. Yeah that and also watching what we just went through with this lockdown. You know, we have I've three greenhouses so we were able to feed a bunch of people in our in our hundred, you know family. Extended family with the businesses and everything we were able to like provide a little bit of food. Not not as much as they would need but we certainly saved them at least one or two trips to the grocery store.


But by providing them pasta that you know, some of the fresh vegetables a roll of toilet paper, you know, some soap like that kind of shit that they just couldn't get at the store. We had to go through commercial channels to get some of this these materials to get some severely underrated pleasure to be able to provide for people. Yeah, I mean It's so we were able to do that for over a hundred families, you know in our in our little circle. I want to build I want to build more at that. I want to do more of that. So I think that's awesome. So I think in a little town like there's all these little towns all over the United States that dried up because they put the bypass in and put the Walmart in the Home Depot out away from the little town beautiful structures, you know solid buildings that just dried up.


So now you're seeing a Resurgence of these little towns Turning around from what they were to being a diesel thriving things in the kind of Cornerstone of that stuff is you know food lodging restaurant Brewery or Winery Distillery, you know, there's there's that little concentration of things Old Town Cottonwood, Arizona. That's a hot spot for wineries, even though The Vineyards and the wine makers are down and Wilcox or Sonoita or Elgin. One of their tasting rooms is in this little old town. That was just beat the shit like 15 years. Years ago you could you could you know pick up the property for you know, they pay you to take it but now it's like a little thriving Metropolis because you have this concentration of restaurants and wineries in this one little spot.


That's interesting. I think we're also starting to be aware of the value and having everything you need in close proximity where you're not shipping things in right like it used to be like the idea of by American was sort of this. Zena phobic so, you know semi racist notion that fuck the rest the world. We're number one, but now people going oh, but you know what it wouldn't it be great if we can get our medicine here, we don't have to rely boats that come over from China like wouldn't it be wouldn't it be great if all the components that we need to make an automobile or actually manufactured and instructed right here when it be great if I'll fucking single cell phone was made in America.


I mean they don't make a goddamn one of them here. Everything is made in Asia. I still think you're going to need you're going to need to trade the trade routes have to stay open. There's things that you can do. Well or as well as somebody else in terms of just you know, the spice trade was exactly that you couldn't know that you couldn't grow these spices here you get them from side else and they were desirable, you know, tulips and Holland like there's just there's something that's wanted and desired by other places and there's things you can do really well for sure, but it would be nice to be self-sustaining. Yes, like trade is always going to be significant and those end up being those end up being the side dishes that are like the icing on the cake and way but you should be able to figure out what grows in your area what sustainable in your area and what you know, what you can do to kind of like you don't have to shut your borders off just right just be open to understanding that when the shit hits the fan you guys are kind of a little self-contained thing that you can weather it.


Yeah, that would be nice and this is this is a new feeling like I never I never thought about that before but when the beginning of the lockdown Down one of the things I was thinking I was like are we going to come to a point where we don't have enough food? Like how is the food going to get here is our people if they're not working. They're going to grow the food what happens if the like the early predictions were terrifying right? They're going to lose two million Americans like everybody is terrified that didn't come to pass but it was a moment where you're like, well what if this gets way worse than that even like, how are we going to get to a point where there's no power? Well, we're going to give them a try. What are we relying on? That's not So you're going to be here when we think about what do we need to sustain ourselves?


What are we relying on that may or may not be here if the shit hits the fan and I feel like this was kind of a practice run. Yes. I feel like it's there's another one coming and you can have all the shit ton of people that don't make it because you're like that first one was fake. And this one is too cool. Can I can I get a set of keys to your house existing? It's so strange. I'm just gonna had a friend a long time ago who had been In in Iraq, and he had taken some whatever you had to take for Anthrax for whatever and we used to joke. Like if we get hit with Anthrax, it's going to affect you. It's not going to affect me and I'm just going to tell you now.


I'm going through your pockets. No offense. Yeah, I uh, I think this is a practice run and I wonder you know, I wonder how many people are going to relax again after this is over because if something really big happens like and this is and I'm not trying to diminish anybody that lost a loved one or two to diminish the significance of this disease the two hundred plus thousand people that died in this country, but compared to a supervolcano compared to a solar flare or an asteroid impact right entire State on fire. Well that well, that's California to stay now, Colorado.


Yeah, California's lost more than a million Acres. Yeah. So you add all those things up and they start to really look like something little pieces. Yeah, so remember how to grow shit. So I'm saying yes, remember how to grow shit, that'd be very nice and don't go to a place where it doesn't rain. Yeah things light on fire place where it doesn't rain. Yeah. Is it raining out and Jerome? It hasn't rained for a long time, but we had so much snow two years ago. And this last year that the snowpack actually fed the grant the water. The groundwater so Jerome has a decent amount of water this year. It has a range. So that's distressing your get all your stuff with.


Well water. Yeah. Well, it's all around Spring Mountain Springs. So we are guys. Yeah, so we it's and it's all the stuff that's gathered from the snowpack that's coming down through the rocks. And now what up during this whole pandemic, what about your Austria and like serving think it did. Okay. We just we did everything, you know, whatever the rules were. We went above and beyond the rules but But we made sure we were providing food. We're making sure that we had stuff to serve you and making sure that people got fed. What were the rules out there where they because it's not it was a deliberate completely shut down for like six weeks seven weeks and then they said okay, if you're if you're serving if you're serving food you have alcohol when you're serving food, you can sell the bottles to go you can serve food to go.


So we did that set the table up did that as soon as they say? Okay, you can be at 50% occupancy. Okay, great. So something will separate the Abel's out and let people come in, you know where your mask only way to the bathroom just be cool. Just right. Well, yeah and we did okay. I mean we're not you know, we're definitely down from last year but there's restaurants. There's I mean the restaurant industry is fucking hammered. Yeah, you know, if you're been keeping up on that. Oh believe me. I've had Adam Perry Lang in and Janet's agreement and she got Bobby Stuckey on here. Who's Bobby Bobby Stuckey from Frasca Food and Wine and In Boulder, Colorado. Okay. He's he's one of them.


I've seen him out there championing like trying to get this funding for the for the small restaurants. These people that have these amazing restaurants. I was telling you about Felix Felix is in Venice. They're very lucky that they have this outside area there they can set up there and it's they're very fortunate. They have that kind of space. Yeah, but so many people do not yeah and there and La just won't let him open right now. I won't let him up at half capacity. They won't let him open but you can't survive it a capacity and most restaurants are operating at a ten percent margin if there. In great. They were Janet was explaining that when she was in here. I thought that's it's not it's not what you think. It's like right the thing that blows my mind though jumping, you know, several hats here is watching people go.


I'm just going to get my I'm going to get my relief money. I'm hang out. Hey, you want a job we have this job we need to do with there's this job that continues to need to be done. Even when all the shit's going on like weed. We're still digging holes. We're still pulling at my chest and I won't get my check. Okay, so let's just be clear so you don't want to to do help me do the job. You want to get your money? Okay. It's not a lot of money and it's not going to be forever. But I'm going to figure out a way to do this job without you. And then when you come looking for the job when the money runs out, I'm going to say fuck you eat a dick hmm bag of salty dicks or sweet salty which ever take your teaching you choose sweet or salty bag of dicks for you because we figured out how to do without you.


We needed you we needed you and then you don't want to do it. No matter of money is going to patch this up like it's where there's a thing. We're actually doing. We have to 10 The Vines we have to tend the greenhouse. There's Things we have to do to get there. So you're talking about specific instances inside of your community. Oh, yeah. Okay. I'm not I'm talking about in Los Angeles or in a big city, you get that sort of diffusion of responsibility thing with oh, yeah so many people and there's a lot of people are just rather take that check just take what you're getting that out of employees. Yeah. Well used to be. Yeah. Yeah, we found a way around you but it's funny all some people will be angry at you for that. They'll say Well, then why should they risk their?


Our Lives to work Yeah, why should you well? Do you if you are going to do this with your employees, do you give them precautions on how to protect themselves? Absolutely, we do the our employees are our first and you know, first and foremost our employees are the first consideration keeping them safe. So any policies if I have to take the hit for the policy, I'll take the hit for the policy because I'm protecting the employee have you thought about providing them with vitamins and zinc and that kind of thing. We just yeah, we put them in rubber suits. Rubber suit just kidding. I got the devil masks with uh, no just you just have to you just have policies in place and you you arm them with the the authority to have a person not be able to be in your store if they're not going to respect.


Yeah constant interaction that that employee has to go through all day long. So same thing is a in a plane like that that flight attendant had just breathe your cigarette smoke for years and do all of them died of cancer. No did some of them get cancer not all of them got Not all of them died of cancer, but they risk getting those argument about bars to write like yeah, they should be able to smoke in bars. Like what about the people who have to work in those bars every day. Are you exposing that person to that thing? That's why you don't not because of you not because of my clothing being stinking like cigarettes. No, it's because that person is being exposed to that every day and the more they're exposed to it the more they're being put at risk. That's your your that responsibility for your fellow human.


Is that but on the bright side we have been Provided with videos of these fucking non mask protesting douchebags that just scream at Walmart and scream at people about the take it away. My write comedy is like the same a cornucopia of comedies. It's like billowing out like all year long. It's been incredible. It's amazing. How many people are at the cutting you off pretty soon I got to get. Yeah. You got your flight. So one more time. Let's go over the thing. It's the the what is the date of the vehicle? She October XXX over 30th is the concert film being streamed online at Puscifer live.com. You can get tickets.


The album itself is out on the 30th as well. You can go to you know, Spotify iTunes Amazon. You can buy it off the Pulsar for.com website CD vinyl the Divinyls all sold out and you have two songs that are available right now that we have two songs are available right now and when it happens, we will put it up on the Instagram and let all the folks know. Okay, look, I know you're busy as Fox are really Shit you taking the time to come and for and thank you for all the gifts - I will read it. I'll read it protection. You should hold them. You should wear the the the boxing gloves while you're reading it. I'm going to keep this lunch box closed near and dear to my heart Maynard. You're bad motherfucker. Appreciate your brother. Thank you, man.


Thank you. Goodbye everybody. Thank you. Bye. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to Squarespace the host of my website in a place where you can go to build a fucking Such a new website you can do it yourself. You don't need any help in the let you try for free goto squarespace.com Joe for a free trial then when you're ready to launch use the offer code Joe to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. We're also brought to you by Juve j o VV and their amazing red light therapy device. I fucking love it. It's an amazing piece of equipment and it makes It's me, feel good.


And I want you to try it and they've got a hookup for you for a limited time. Juve wants to hook you up with an exclusive discount your first order. Just go to juvie. That's Jo ovv.com Joe and apply my code Joe to your qualifying order exclusions apply limited time only. We are also brought to you by 4 Sigma attic and they're delicious and nutritious mushroom coffee. It tastes great. It's easy on Got and it's actually good for you. It's got less caffeine than regular coffee, but it's actually nutritious. It's got lines made for the brain chaga for the immune support and they got a sweet deal for you.


They got a sweet deal on their best-selling lion's mane coffee. This is just for Jerry listeners receive up to 40% off on their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim his deal. You must go to for Sig Matic.com / Rogan this offers only for JRE listeners. It's not available on the regular website. Go to fo you are SI G. M-- ATI c.com Rogan and get yourself some delicious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out and we're brought to you by whoop the fitness tracker that I wear 24/7. It's the shed. It measures your resting heart rate heart rate variability measures your sleep tells you when you've recovered tells you when you haven't tells you how much You've rested in the evening, so you can't lie to yourself and whoops gonna hook you up.


They're going to offer 15% off all memberships give whoop a shot. And if it's not for you, they offer a 30-day return policy. No questions asked head over to whoop. That's wh oop.com enter Rogan Rog aan at checkout save 15% off joined group today and sleep better recover faster and train smarter. Thank you. My friends much loves you all bye-bye. Bye.