
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by CBD MD and they're fantastic CBD products. This is an easy ad for me to do because I use their products every single day. I love CBD MD's topicals. I love their gummies. I love their oils. I love CBD and CBD MDS CBD products are as good as they get. I love CBD recover. It's the best thing that I've ever found for. Muscle strains and soreness. It combines CBD with blood flow enhancing compound histamine die hydrochloride to temporarily relieve minor aches and pains and give you the support that you need where it matters most.


I also love their CBD fries with menthols an award-winning product that offers instant cooling relief for muscles and joints in a convenient easy to use roller or a shareable squeeze tube. I'm not sharing it with anybody. Okay, but I like the roller. The reason why I like the roller is like a roll on like you would use for antiperspirant, but you can dig into the muscles and you can actually massage yourself with those their oils. I love CBD p.m. It's a fantastic sleep aid with CBD with melatonin valerian root and Camp. They just make great products and CBD is an important part of my daily routine. I get all my CBD from CBD MD and to make it even easier to try this amazing Duo of top.


Topicals and everything else CBD MD has to offer they're offering JRE listeners 25 percent off your next order when you use the promo code Rogan at checkout. So once again that CBD em d.com use the promo code Rogan to save 25% off your purchase of their Superior CBD products from CB D MD. We're also brought to you by whoop whoop and they're fantastic Fitness tracker that I wear. Twenty-four hours a day. I love it and I particularly love it during sober October because during this entire month. I'm not just not drinking. I'm also working out every single day.


I love that. I can check my Loop strap and find out how well I've recovered how much sleep I've gotten. It is an amazing Fitness tracker the best that I've ever used. It gives you a mountain of data. It takes from your body amount of data because you wear it 24/7 it applies it to its algorithm and it gives you actionable data that you can use use to help your life. You can find out how much sleep you should get or how well you slept you could find out how much stress your body should take on for working out or how strenuous your day has been the Insight whoop provides is truly Next Level it against the best fitness tracker I've ever used. It doesn't just count calories or stabs it lets, you know how behaviors like taking CBD or drinking caffeine or or certain diets will impact your sleep and Recovery in a way that's personalized to you so that you can understand how to better.


Optimize your behaviors. I love it. And for anybody looking to build healthier smarter habits. Whoop is a no-brainer. I wear it all the time all year long 24/7 and for listeners this podcast whoop is going to offer you 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout. So go to whoop, that's wh oop.com enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15% off the best fitness tracker known to human beings get to know yourself on a deeper level. Level unlock yourself with whoop. We're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app. That's right the cash app. You probably already know.


If you listen to this podcast the cash apps the easiest way to send money between your friends and family without having to hold out of that dirty paper cash, but the cash have is also the very best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry. As stacking SATs SATs is short for Satoshi who is a legendary person who created bitcoin. Nobody even knows who it is. It's a mystery. What's not a Mysteries with Bitcoin is Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority and many people think that is the way currency should be handled.


How does this happen? How do we ever implement this on a larger scale? Gail well, it starts with buying Bitcoin and the best way to do that is through the motherfucking cash app. And when you download the cash app enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word, when you do that, you will receive ten dollars and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Ren's fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo. So you get 10 bucks 10 bucks goes to an amazing cause please do not forget use the promo code Joe. All one word when you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today, and we're also brought to you by Simply Safe Simply.


Save is one of the most recognized and respected home security systems on Earth. In fact the US News and World Report named it the best overall home security of 2020. Now, here's the thing about home security companies most of them. Trap you with high prices, tricky contracts and shitty customer support. So while there are a lot of options out there. There's only one no-brainer and that is Simply Safe simply say it's got everything you need to protect your home with none of the drawbacks of traditional home security. It's got an arsenal of sensors and cameras to blanket every room window and door tailored specifically for your home professional monitoring which keeps watch day and night ready to send police fire or medical professionals if there's an emergency You see you can set it up yourself in under an hour just peel and stick the sensors exactly where you need them.


No technician is required and there's no contract. No pushy sales guys. No hidden fees. No fine print and all this starts at just 15 bucks a month. What are you waiting for head to Simply Save.com Rogan and get a free HD camera for listeners of this podcast. That's Siem pli sa Fe. We save.com Rogan go there and make sure that they know we sent you my friends. My guest today is one of the greatest boxers to ever put on a pair of gloves. He was a huge hero of mine when I was a young man.


I'm a gigantic fan of his it was a huge honor to have him here in the JRE studio and he is going to be fighting Mike Tyson at age 51. Multiple Division World Champion should have been Gold medals in the Olympics, but they fucked them. He is the Great and Powerful Roy Jones jr. The Joe Rogan Experience trying my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Roy Jones jr. Ladies and gentlemen, how's that my brother? How you doing? Honored to have you in here? I've been a fan forever. I noticed and I was going to tell you that I am very happy to be here for you and for me because I've been a fan of yours as well.


But I always loved the support that you give me you've always supported me since day one. You've been one of the best people that I can hear talk about me since day one. So I just want to say thank you man for all the support. But being a brother thank you, sir. Thank you. My pleasure. Wasn't that we publish now, you know for sure. I've been a fan forever like from way back in the day, you know, you know, you saw you almost forgot I didn't forget shit. I remember all of it man. I remember when your fights were basically executions exactly. This is just it was some years man where you would just like see how is this guy going to survive and how long and you you had there was a time in your career when you were at your Peak?


Peek will you had devised this style? That was so different than anyone else is very few Jabs. You would throw a lead hook and no one knew how to prepare for because there was no sparring partners that can emulate it your speed was off the charts your movement was off the charts. It's I think to this day you're the only person in compubox history that went a full round without having a single punch scored on them and they say I'm not too busy because if I did ever Listen, that's that's no other with I mean, maybe Willie Pat might have done that back in the day before compubox. Yeah, compubox era. Nobody has ever gone on a complete round. Would I get a punch scored on ridiculous?


You came here the best pound-for-pound or you the best at least defensive fighter and we know about the offense but I don't argue not just listening what people say now there was a time where I would say, like people would say oh, but he didn't fight anybody. I'm like the fuck he didn't they just couldn't they couldn't compete. That's all. Us you fought World Champions like the thugs they I just make them look like nobody Ya'll Must Have Forgot. It's you had a such a strange style man. How did you devised that style? Honestly man. It was like it was a lot. My father was a fighter who was trained by so I shelf in the I think at some point armed services in a way my father learned a lot, but you also learn a lot of things not to do.


So by learning those things he was able to give me a very good foundation with the foundation. My father had roosters fighting roosters when I was young so I would watch The Roosters all the time because roosters develop a picking order and he will always talk about no fighting almost this that they develop a pecking order on their own. Anyway, they're gonna do that anyway, so I would always watch him to figure out what made one the king of the pecking order what made him better than the rest and when I learned what that It was a few things. I figured out once I would take them out I start emulating emulating those things in my box style. So from fighting chickens, yes, what was the thing that you notice?


Well, first of all the one that used it was on top he knew a kid except for the error or of confidence that he was going to be messed with so when he fight he do a lot more faking a lot more faint never let them know when he coming obviously the day goes and he stayed powerful. He stayed the same. The whole day and it's like anytime. He wouldn't hurt. Anybody did the same thing. He used the same thing same. Thanks, and he often would do things that other chickens just didn't know what to do, but that's god-given. Hmm and insisting that God gave him that so if you learn his characteristics, which I watch how you kill yourself all day long the way he carried himself and he wasn't around of of the way he got rid of one of them came around people say people used to think that I was very egotistical.


I've never been an egotistical person but what I was a highly confident person I'm God's game rooster. Hmm. If you give me another one around guess what I'm going to defend my turf that's a funny thing to say to a world champion Fighters one of the greatest of all time your egotistical mean. Listen, if you're not confident, you don't get to that place never ever impossible like dude like you have to have a belief in yourself and see there's no other way if you don't who's gonna believe in you? Yeah. No. Buddy. Yeah, I was a fan back when you got fucked over in the Olympics. Goddamn. Did they ruin that that was terrible? That was one of the worst Olympic decisions I've ever seen in my life.


Maybe the worst who was so bad, but it was in Korea, right? Yep. It was in Seoul South Korea in the Korean fighter Hood. Yeah goddamn, that was ridiculous. It was one of those fights where you like. Well, he got the gold medal clear and then you see the decision. You jaw drops, you know, like what is this it hurts? Of boxing especially amateur boxing it heard it because when you can take a kid 19 years old, he defeats his rival clearly and you Robin it really eliminates the Integrity of that sport. Yeah, and you still don't go back and fix it. Hmm. Nobody to this day has come back and try to fix it. They gave me Olympic orders.


They gave me the valve Walker cup, which is for the best box at the Olympics were that's my prediction this contradiction. How is the best boxer here now wearing a gold medal? Yeah, it was it was bad. But it also was in one way and made people really root for you. It was a blessing in disguise and I understood that this the second day. I think I might have cried whole first day, but II like well, I didn't cry out to after I went to the back and asks hex ask The Interpreter to ask him if he waited 30 beat me because if you say yes, then he didn't know it but he's gonna get nothing. But he said no, I know I didn't win but it wasn't my fault.


It was the judges I shook his hand and I left I never had never another bad feeling towards him because he didn't do it. Give me your right Fisher understand what is cut but then also realized that not only were the judge is not necessary that they are to be blamed. But what God did was take their negative and turn into a positive and look where I'm at. Now. It was a big toddler remember when you began your career. Here there was a big talk of your career how you got fucked over in the Olympics? It was not a it wasn't a question. Not at all. There was no debate. There's no I never saw a single person to made an argument that he won. It was all you and so that when you began your career, you have a lot of people rooting for you.


Yes, and that was a beautiful thing. That's the blessing above all for me because to me it was God's way of making me not put my life on Idol but Turn Me Up On High. Yeah. I had no clue what he's doing, but that's why you just trust in God. Look where you at now. Yeah, I remember when you fought James Toney and that was a big fight because James Tony was in his prime and you were in your Prime and again, you caught him with that leaping left hook man. That crazy left hook and drop them when U when you beat James Toney like that. I think a lot of people had to go. Whoa, like he can do this to an elite top of the food chain world champion. That's what makes a real Superior athlete not that we could do it together as who was beneath you when you can do it the guys who are supposed to be your equal off of you.


That's when you really doing it now people maybe people don't know, but you have been active and you fought up until about what like two years ago 2018. Yep, so you decided you're done or were you 100% done or were you just hit a hundred percent done as you're pathetic tell me walk me through this call. How do you get this call to fight Mike Tyson? Well, one of his gases him calls me Guillotines McGee my partner to tell me to call so I call. Xena Xena says Hey might want to do a comeback. He wants to do an exhibition, but he wants you to be his dance partner me. Yeah, I said, okay. Well, let's see if we can work out I said, yeah, we got a lot of different situations going on, but they want to do it on different format and they want to do it in a way that you and Michael are taking care of and everything is good.


Well that didn't try to be necessary with the case was but me being Roy Jones jr. That's being in cold, but I'm like, you know what? Six weeks that's right around the corner. He ain't been fighting I can get rid of I'm pretty sure I can get a little bit more ready than he can because he's been inactive a lot longer than I hear ya. So six weeks. I know it's Mike Tyson. He's big as hick and he's still Mike Tyson. He's still can punch but six weeks is no way he can get prepared for this. So I said, you know what I'll take that I just don't well lo and behold happens and they changed now, why did they change? What was the Did they give a reason they said something about marketing?


They told me something about marketing but I don't really believe much of what was said. I mean, I just can't believe it. You know because we had a September 12 days out for football season start basketball may have started it but people at home with nothing to do and that's why I was like, you know what I want him when I was in my Prime, so why not take him now, I mean 12 and six weeks that's easy and they said well, we got more attention than we expected to get. And this happened and that happened so we want to move it man. So I was thinking about it and doing it to my guy. He posted something about the new date on my site.


And when he did that day was like well that means that you admitted that you agreed to it I didn't but okay, that's how it goes. I'll be that guy, you know, I don't back out of nothing ain't like I'm scared of Mike Tyson, please Mike Tyson. It's just that I know that in six weeks. He had no chance to deal yesterday. In 12 weeks where he make it leave it here having a better chance to deal with me but his chances still gonna be rough but it's gonna be better than it would have been six weeks six weeks. He didn't have a chance now during the time where you were off. Will you working out when you were still staying fit because you always stayed slim you look good. I have to work out because I trained a lot of guys and when you trade guys for me, I like to not only just teaching like also give them an example that this example is the best that I think did what they What I'm teaching them and I want to teach them what I learned and what my style was.


So I like to be able to demonstrate by example lead by example. So do you have young guys that fight in your style? They are tracked what city fighting monsters and I don't really necessary to treat them to fight like me. My style is not necessarily just me but I style means that you know how to counter everything you no offense, you know defense, you know footwork, you know everything else. Victims boxing is what my style is now the craziness that's your individual person. Right your DNA will decide what you do with that. What I do is shooting I try to make guys comfortable and to give them every opportunity to execute on another guy's mistakes if I can make you do that and have you prepared always prepared for the next move then that's my style.


Mmm. Your style required extreme physical attributes, though. You know, that's a well physical attributes. It does require extreme attributes, but when you come and watch one of my classes like I got a Apprentice over in Sweden. I got an apprentice over in South Africa got a few apprentices that I've been teaching. I got one out of Washington state and when I teach them they understand that yeah people blame on athleticism, but it's not all that lettuce is mmm. There's a lot more knowledge to it than people ever would begin to understand. Yes, damn it. So yeah people say, ah, he's a super Actually, no take me back. Yeah, I can go visit it or verbally walk you through every knock out that I got and or every set up to knock out before it happened sometimes rounds before it happens.


Sometimes don't have a quick I can tell you exactly what happened exactly what I saw and why I did what I did is that physical attributes. No. No, this is there's no way it could be just that it's impossible. You guys know that's a lot of freak athletes. Of course, of course you had freak athleticism as Well as like an insane comprehensive understanding of boxing. Yeah, but that's what makes it great. Right? Yeah, you got to have a insane comprehension. But what I do have the Freak the freak the freaking this about me is my hands be because how can I still be this fast at 51 years old? I was watching you hit the pads. Holy cow. I be looking at IBC it. Whoa, is that? Yeah. I mean double triple quadruple left hands on her.


I'll pop out tomorrow. Wow. Yeah, it's crazy. We just talked about the are you want. I know it's not Like in the day no back in the day 51 was done. Oh, but it was so it's different today with the new training methods and understanding of the human body and supplements. Like people are different but you were always different to I always tell people like you had crazy biceps but small triceps like you were built to throw hooks. Exactly. That's correct. Like if you look at your body when you were in your Prime you had these are gonna get no I still like them. Left is way bigger than your right hook in the game.


Yeah, that's not sweat. That's a serious imbalance. Now when you train young guys, what do you what do you do? When you're you're showing them your style do you try to get them left hook heavy the way you are and you just let them do whatever their style isn't just teach them what you know about boxing. I'll take whatever you got. Well your best attributes are and we work from there. I I am not God. I cannot reinvent the wheel. If you're me, I think there's some stuff but not the week the wheel was already made like it is you can't reinvent the wheel the wheel. So what I do is whatever God has given you we try to take that and take that to the next level. Now you get this phone call you just immediately start training and when you immediately start training how you ramping up for a fight like that.


You know, it's like I heard Mike say something about when he started training he was in the bed for a week. Yeah. I wouldn't be here for a week because I was going a lot already put I was asked to a person for a couple days. Did you mean did it feel good to say? Oh, wow. I got a big fight coming up. I gotta go. We're back. I was excited. Yeah, because it's Mike Tyson. So it's like in most cases you will say yes. I got a big fighting on the road coming, you know, but this time I was like, you know, what your brother getting a little shape because you are going there with Mike Tyson. Yeah. You don't know what you don't know what Mike Tyson might come in there. Do you know if you had a particular ears? Joe you know what he might do.


So what you better do is get in shape and be prepared for whatever Mike whichever Mike shows up. Yeah, when I read that it was going to be an exhibition. They weren't gonna try not to each other's out. I went the fuck out of here. I mean, thank you think about it. Oh it's exhibition, but we got to have our skills but it's exhibition exhibition. No head gear exhibition judges. I mean, it's still Mike Tyson and exhibitions. Yeah, Mike Tyson who not Corrie Sanders down in the first round of an exhibition back in 2004, correct? So what is your definition of the exhibition because going in the ring with Mike Tyson has nothing exhibitionist about it. No, he doesn't have that in them. I won't you watch him sparse.


His snoring was fight nothing exhibition ish about it. Yeah, they were fights. His sparring was fight if they he does the fight. Yeah. He's now you said that he was always kind of on your radar either way when you were the heavyweight champ when you beat John Ruiz, he was on the other person I would have They have a week really because he was the youngest heavyweight champion ever. And to be honest. I probably was the lightest who I started lighter than anybody only Junior middleweight to ever go in heavyweight title. So I'll just smallest guy. They'll come up in here we time how much did you weigh when you fart Ruiz 200 200. Wow, and so did you think when you're getting ready to fight? Like what do you walk around that right now now I'm heavier than I was then yeah.


Yeah. Now what can I like 220 some time to 20 I've been up to 20. So do you feel good at 220 or do you do would you like to be lighter and I met I met about 210. Now this why I want to be it right there hands fast as ever still a lot of Mobility not too much weight on these knees so I feel pretty good at 2:10. So I think I'm gonna stay around this area. That's not much different than him because when he was in his prime, he was about to 15 min. He was a light heavyweight, you know for a lighter rather heavy weight. I like explosive hit. Yeah, super super explosive heroin. I was like sighs. It doesn't really matter with Mike. I mean it matter with reads because I knew I was going to push the live in the hole with Mike sighs over the matter.


Now when you decided to go up and fight Ruiz for the heavyweight title, did you think that was one and done or did you think once I win that title? Maybe I'll defend it a few times. Like what was your thoughts getting ready for that fight? So as you know me, I'm a man of my word. I try to be and I said I wanted to go do what Bob Fitzsimmons did but I was going to add. A little bit to it because I was also super middleweight champion, which was a division. That wasn't around when Bob Fitzsimmons did this in 1896. Well what Bob Fitzsimmons did was he won the middleweight title the light heavyweight title the heavyweight title and then they recaptured the light heavyweight title. Hmm. That's a big segment of the whole thing recapturing the light heavyweight title.


So if I go up and do what I did when the heavyweight title and don't recapture the light heavyweight title. I Q in my any your eyes and say ID will profit somebody because I did right at the airport already did but the hardest part is come back we have week and we capture that light heavyweight title. That's why I came back did it. But before I depart at the heavyweight Division, I would have thought Mike Tyson because of what I told you earlier. He was the youngest heavyweight champ of all times to me. He's one of the most explosive entertaining guys you want to see because you never know what you're going to do and it's the same reason I'm going in with him. Right now because he's explosive entertaining and you never know what he's gonna do.


I mean both of you are in that Notch song, you know that song. Yeah, and then Mike Tyson Roy Jones. Yeah, that's a lie. Exactly. Yeah. I mean very similar in that regard that you both were so dominant over your divisions when you were in your Prime that those fights were like execution. Of course, why did not fight take place back then because nobody ever saw me coming to heavily back then and by the time I did it he was already on the way. The Box yeah, it had departed. So people say I think they say someone told him that I was awful for the meeting to fight Mike Tyson know I wasn't if I was on for the me, we've been fighting. I mean, I tell people today like they always talk about know what's going on with the zone and all these Fighters.


Listen man. If I was in today's time and I was worried your own sandwich. I was I am if they told me Roy will pay you 20 million perfect for five fights we get to pick the pain. - I said matter of fact don't even worry about picking up only y'all call me Tim. What did I'm fine? What wait I'm fighting it and I don't care who it is. Just tell me when I'm fight. And what would I need to be? I believe it you're telling me that's who I am. So it's like when they talk about I would have fought a know if they would offer me for them in the fight of Mike was just here. Ya go too far for that we fought for that's how bad I want to find back. Then people. Love to talk though. Yeah, they say a lot of stupid shit. Yeah, it makes sense.


But that's just that's people need something to talk about when I know but I'm just a I'm Bea want to clear it up because I was not offered money to fight my baby and I would have been if I would have our default Mike then I wanted to fight my he's the only other hit we A I would have fought it but it sounds like no I'm not give you an opportunity. I'm not first of all, I'm a small guy coming up to the heavyweight Division. I don't belong up here. Anyway, I just want to do a Bob Fitzsimmons. Did it prove I can do or see if I could do it call Sugar Ray Robinson. Try to go when the light heavyweight title and he passed out. Yeah, so he didn't win it. So, of course, we always want to try or challenge ourself. I want to see what the Scott with roofie you. Can I win the heavyweight title. Am I really that good as good as I think I am. Maybe I am this find out how difficult was it to get from 200 pounds of go all the way back down to 175.


That was the hardest thing I ever did in my life 25 pounds of muscle. Yeah put on my makeup skills don't that's the difference because if you look at you and you fart Ruiz, there was nothing to be lost 25 pounds of pure muscle. So that first fight I want a pure heart we talk. Yeah pure heart. That's when people and I had people even texting me and calling. And tell me, you know, I was a fan I like you but like you a whole lot more now because I realize what you really are. I never knew you had that big of a heart that was a big transition for you mean and maybe a bad transition to go from heavy weight down to the light heavyweight again because you can see physically you weren't the same because of that way cut you were struggling and that was the talk of all the commentators are like, what is what is happening to his body that he's going from 200.


Pounds ripped down to 175 and then competing. I mean you must have cut an extreme amount of weight for the weight like and it was this the day before weigh-ins or the day of ways they were poor but it didn't matter because I had pulled so much muscle off. Yeah, so you can't you can't put that back right? You know, I mean so I couldn't put that back but the what's what's what's so ironic about that. Is that as weak as I was? He still can get me out because my mind said I got to do a Bob Fitzsimmons sick did I mean so because my mouth is locked on something. You can't keep me out of the my mind locked in I was weak as I probably ever have been my mind said no, we're going to forget this and I got it and then you went for them again.


Yeah, that's I probably shouldn't have because like I said my body hidden came back yet and I didn't have nothing Mitchell to get there. I'll just want to call people say well you get your hard time. Okay. Well, I didn't get fight nobody. So y'all me fighting against it why not? But I had nothing. Game, so it's little bit hard. So he closed eyes got lucky. It's called good. But I mean, hey, it's box. You know for me though. That first win was one of the most impressive things in my career because it's the first time I have had to win a fight with strictly my heart because your body just wasn't provided with him there. Now when you were walking around after the Ruiz fight, like what did you what did you weigh when you started cutting down for the Torah fight? 2003 2003 and how did you do it?


Like what what what kind of what you do in crazy? Cardio, like what were you doing to try to lose? All that weight? Crazy cardio is all the way over did it all the way I ever did I run two sometimes three times a day JC the week down. Yep. That's on the way. I've lost from our suits the whole day or time. Damn. What kind of impact must have hair on your body? Well, that's what people fail to realize now here kids talk about. Oh, we couldn't make way that we couldn't man. Don't tell me that I'm from the old school. Don't scare me none this new school stuff. You couldn't lose a pound. Don't tell me that man when I was a mature. Well, I'm sure my dad made me go down and 147 for the Eastern Olympic trials.


I fought that night I made 147. I fought that night. I got to I got out the fight. I wouldn't let him skill. I was 165 pounds. I had to fight the next day at 147. I had to make week then this morning. Wait a minute ran all night. 7:13 this morning. I got all the way down to one forty eight and a half. And I said, I can't go no more my dad that why you can't lose much. You lose our power. No, I don't have to know because it hit me it was God talking to me. I don't got to talk to me how you gonna do this every night and I'm from any country, you know, it's gonna be cold, you know, so rain you not going to know where to go run it you not going you might not even be allowed to go out and run an area you are so if you make the Olympics at this weight how you gonna make with every night you and for 147 to 165.


Yeah. That's it. Dump them back down to 140 and a half and you tell me y'all can lose a pound or two pounds get out of here with that fur. So it was that when you made a decision to go up. Yeah. I thought I was already up. He made me come down. Hmm. You know, what back? How old were you then 17? I'll see your body's. Just trying to get the 1818 filling out a TIA that's yeah. It's the I think one of the big problems with MMA is supposed to boxing is there's a very limited number of weight classes. Yes. I think there's a lot of Fighters that ruin their body. Cutting too much weight and going down here about these guys sometime they get so dehydrated. They pass out. I had that happen to me before. Yeah. Yeah, so I understand I know how it goes but there's a science to it and there's a limit that you should do it too.


But you got to know the science and know the limit to how far you can go you don't race ration that out then it's bad for you. Yeah, there's a lot of guys that are very good at it. But ultimately the damage that it does particularly to your kidneys. It's just it's not worth it. I wish MMA Had more weight classes. I don't know if boxing is the right number because like there's a lot of boxing, you know, sometimes it's like 40 75460 68 like there's so many weight classes, but there's a good argument that that's better and you look at boxing. There's so many super fights that can be had to because there's Champions that are so close to each other. Yeah a few pounds here or there is better because it gives a lot more people the opportunity to become to become world champions, but at the same time like you said, they could have been down a weaknesses Only the Strong Will Survive baby, we gotta go it's gonna eat with callosum of these paper Champion.


They get cooled out real quick. So do you think you'd be better that way? I know it would be the right. Yeah. Look look look. I want to hide it from me. I'll quote from Dreamin wait to hit we always end the winner. Tyler dream middleweight is cause my dad wouldn't let me Pack 1 and I knew I was go out go to weight class. So I told her I want to fight gianfranco rosi early because if I can fight Rossi now, they can't title because I ain't gonna be able to say that this week no way. He did let me do it, but I would have here title from 54 already hit with wow. That would be done president. Of course what made you go from 68 to 75 ran out of competition. I was just went to where the competition was.


So after I beat James felt pens, I think then they start giving me the God bless today. But Tony Thornton's and no 1 Contender that really the world didn't know. I wonder what find somebody that the world knew which was like a Persian. He'll take that Reggie Johnson. Thank God. Some would say the following day. I went 75 to make bigger better fights those guys were all bigger than me too. But I went where I had to go to make fights. So it's like people often I mean this guy got used to coach Triple G. I can't think of his name a tables and chairs. I said GG should went up long time ago and tried under a war zone the eight pounds, right?


But Abel Sanchez his ah, he's too little to do that. We find 16 now. Yeah, you understand me. Delaware always from 54 to 75. So how you tell me? He too lived a said. Oh you did against bump Mike McCalla a bomb ever gave James Toney to the heart and face of Jones James Thomas career before me and my chair Griffin did it so knocked out McCrory if you haven't so you Tim he's a bum. Yeah, but I find that they are healing bit older. But like you said look at us now or not. Don't Curry. Dr. Curtis. That's right. Yeah, that don't cry knockout made me so sad I was a giant Donald crazy him and I was rooting for my I've got my shoes on them. Running around like three miles and I came home and I said I am never invest in that much in a fighter again because it was like I lost it.


I remember you caught him with that left hook to the body that allegedly chin and the 100 not seeing Donald laid out on the canvas was like fuck because when Donald knocked out McCrory When Donald knocked out Milton McCrory, I remember thinking like damn like he's so fast, you know, he was so it was the Cobra, you know what to say to cope. Whoa, he was so fast and then when he got ko'd like, Thought I was like, I can't believe this is happening. I had to go running. Yeah, I know but fuck for able to say I fought a bomb no crazy. I mean so that was an animal. Yeah to me you you trying to Know cover Hopkins you fuck, you know Nana, but you're covering up for what you're not doing because the trip she was good. We say it was for my weight class.


Hello Kim him. I mean, yeah to me. You tri Triple G opportunity. Yeah, if you want he becoming one of the pound-for-pound you can't say John Ruiz the greatest heavyweight of all time being but he was no bomb. No. Behold of yeah, exactly not gonna fit now with right hand example two or three people are not going to see at Holyfield that right. Yeah, he's one up. He's a tough guy. Of course. He was very tough guy. It's just you had the style to beat him and he just couldn't compete with your speed and your fluidity and your understanding of distance. Yeah, you just controlled that fight. I try to teach gas every up every way every aspect of boxes so that you understand some guys because you're tall you're gonna have to fight clothes.


Some time because there are guys that realize you're tall and they know they got to get close to you doing let's get this opportunity hide behind so you got to get close. Yeah. Look ahead with it. Yeah, took him up. I heard you cry. Here's the triangles here knows how to fight close to just that he's not in condition to fight close for a long time because that's not what he trains and doing well. I agree had a ridiculous chin that it was wet deck. You'll Granite ridiculous Granite. Yeah. It was one guy knocked him down, but it was a bullshit knock down all the entire career. Yeah, who was Knocked him down. I'm trying to remember the name. I will conduct I don't remember the dude one roll down. Was it Domingo? Wanted to meet a real light a bit more enrolled in.


Yeah my daughter down and then hacker eventually stop. Yeah, you know, I've heard that the element appears to be giving yeah. I was I was I was sitting here because those days were the real days of boxing. Oh, yeah, almost One champion, maybe two but most at once you have your new. Yeah who the champ was at every week. Remember when they Stood out and ibf WBO and ibf how many champs you can enhance the my point though is hit here's my property. I don't have property having more Champs, but why not make every Camp had to fight one another to find out who is the chat right when I was like hit wait, I had seven of the eight known available built and all these are they have the eighth one is because I wasn't going to Germany to take all myself and belts for that one built and they met rob me because I had got robbed in Seoul Korea.


So I learned my lesson I can't go way over there. Darius and I'm the mayor right now. He needs to come see me. Yeah, if you're Often by me to come see me, he turned it down. So what does that tell you? He don't want this smoke? What if I could have got it if I could have got it. I'll hit every built at like him because that's why so I feel like any fighter that is aspiring to be champ or is Champ if you don't want everybody in your weight class. You don't think you're the best. Yeah, it should be if you're calling someone a world. Champion they really should fight the other world champions. If you're going to have a bunch of different sanctioning bodies, they should if they're available. They should have to fight it every year the East Bay West in the NBA the put a championship every year the AFC paid NFC football every year the American League.


His mission was like come on baby at some point. We got to put her somewhere y'all got to show me who the real me and yes, and that's what I wanted to do. That's why I had Seven that I knew of and I asked him what it was you could have put in it let on them if they were known built with that. You can call me and tell me I got a president. I need that bill. Yeah, it was simpler times back in the day for me. It was one champion and win each weight class but yet also understand that a lot of this stuff happens because of promoters sure because I'm doing my own thing I could do what I want to do when I got rich. Yeah, that's like telling y'all call me. Yeah, it ain't hardly gonna fight original Dream.


Just call me and you call me or get a belt. I don't care what build it is. It could be the national Walmart built a Haven. I won't fit when you go back to the hacker days. Like how many belts were there? It was want to tooting it. Maybe I want to be a baby and wc I think yeah, you know what I watch the other day Hagler versus Mugabe that was that was a good fight. That was goodbye when PDF you would for hey what's happening? There's a time of the fight where he hits Haggard with an uppercut. Yes snapped a guy's head back and They're just right back at them right because it was nothing like he didn't even work Hagler won't wasn't in my Dynamite. Doesn't that I learned things from as a kid and what I learned from Heckler was consistency.


He wore the same room the white Trunks and the same Marvin Hagler every time you know, yep, if you fought hag with guess what you're gonna get hagelin. Yep. Yeah. He was no question so disciplined to so disciplined. Yes. I'm I think it was training for my stop at Hampshire. I forget whose training for but one I was a kid. I was living in Boston and I was I was watching this thing. They had him on the news where Haggard was running down the cape Cape Cod in the winter time running the sand dudes screaming war and I got chills. I got goosebumps as watching like just the discipline that man at he was never out of shape. He's psyched herself out the whole training camp. How are ya every day every day every day.


He just had what a mind he had. I mean, he just was so easy, but just so fierce. As a champion, but once again see what I liked about people like Marvin, he was so consistent that not one time did not make weight, right? He wouldn't want up to meet you. He wasn't going down to meet you right meet him at 160. He'll fight him care what your name is. Yep, 160 come on. Yeah, and I look at the fact that when he fought Sugar Ray and I kind of gave it to him. I mean I have to watch it at the I'd have to watch it again now as an adult, but I remember when I watch it back then I thought He won the fight and he just said that's it. I'm done. Never came back went to Italy started making movies.


You ever watched some of those movies. I know watching but I see him every night then sterile areas. Didn't good shape looks pretty good talks. Great. Yep. I mean he has no problems at all. Now what you want, which is amazing. Yeah. It's beautiful to see someone get out clean then of course and have a new life after yes. Yes, but for me for Marvin, I thought that fight at that looked at it as an adult to I thought the fight should have been called a draw at least. IPS and understood why should one because sugar painting the picture before the fight that I'm not even supposed to be in here right right yes they missed anything he did he's going to get two points for with Hagan was going to get one yeah because sugar painter picture to the public that I'm not even supposed to be in here with this monster it's always a problem judging underdogs right if you have mean so that's that's why in the pants he also knows how to play with the crowd yeah so sugar use his brain and got the decision that night but if you look at the actuality of the fight Either was a draw or you probably could have gave the hair grab it because he was hip but I would say that looking at it as an adult.


I would probably scored it a draw but both of them put on and Immaculate fight then like it was a beautiful fight for me because sugar came back and like I said, he painted that picture like I shouldn't even be in here and he was really phenomenal for what he had been on five years. So he made it look like I'm defeating odds. Yeah and everything he did. He did it, too. To such a high level that it made it look like he did if he thought when you were coming up, did you watch a lot of films of the great? Well, I only watched a few guys and I can tell you a lot of the guys I watched one was I used to watch Salvador Sanchez every time I got close to me. He was the best offense of mad at God of all what a tragedy like, I died too young.


Yes, because my dream fight this white this is why I get so pissed off about fights not having like right now I'm mad because Crawford and It's an opportunity to fight one. Another one of my dream fights was is serial, Pedroza versus Salvador Sanchez both of the featherweight Champion one, but two stamps making the to featherweight champ the best at the division. I want to see them lock up see who wins that because I love both of them. I love the Pedro's because of his bowl of punches and because of his knowledge in size real smart, but dirty guy inside the ring, right, but Salvador has so much offense that I wanted to know. How is it going to keep Salvador off of him? With the office. Yeah, and then Salvador unfortunately was killed in a car wreck and that that that just blew my makeup right away.


That was my mega fight probably besides her as little as my other makeup mega mega fight me to meet their original Hearns learning. Yes an all-time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah and Angelo Dundee's in the corner of joy that yellow and a kid and he goes out and wins goddamn that was epic. Whew, that was epic, especially because Turns at 147 could hit people and knock them into another fucking Dimension. When that I to her credit you do that 168 you didn't want to know ran he is did it to the wrong person ever to do to better during yeah all other person I think not doing down was it's the one day Jesus.


He's he face planted him out cold cold. He had that snap because he had that wide tour. So I showed us in ways the third port that punch is there but the show you how much? H how much mental it is should we would take that punch like nobody else? Yeah. Yes - except in the second part. I think she drops her a few times and second bike but that first fight should wake took all of it. He took it. Yeah, I lost him and because they had such a beef. Hmm. That was his right? Yeah. Well he had known that this was the the fight that he had to win for greatness, you know, and it was it was so much. I mean it's hard for people to imagine how big Sugar Ray Leonard was like people don't know the sport of boxing when he was the Olympic.


Champion and he was I mean was it did seven up commercials or some I've got two coming up this light Sprite and he was huge and this was when boxing was on ABC ABC Wide World of Sports. Yep, people don't know there was no cable back then it was giant he was America's super stock if he will and Tommy Hearns was an assassin kill assassin kill. Oh, yeah, the two of them getting together was like one of those who knows fights, you know. Like you get them occasionally today, you know and see just what hurts me about the Olympics right now, but that moved to that they did to me to lose the Integrity see I follow Ray Leonard from the Olympics.


I followed Howard Davis jr. From your life. If you have me these guys were incredible to me because they set a precedence for me. They made me want to represent my country one day at the Olympics they in turn pro and do like they did it become somebody. Yeah, they draw me a blueprint to follow you feel me. Early all George Foreman they draw us a blueprint to follow their living blueprint missed something because that was the epitome of amateur sports, right you're living with the highest level of amateur sports. You can get there get there and represent your country. You're doing something you feel me you're on your way and then they have robbed me. Well remember that was like the doorstep to professional stardom.


That's right thing. Meldrick Taylor for now Whitaker Evander Holyfield members. At one class they had a mark Breeland. Yeah, the Old Randolph. Yes, what a class even even a guy from my area can't Jackson was on that team and everybody was following that and those guys left the Olympics and when they were on the podium with their medals and then they went on to their pro career went on that team. He's on the fence 16 my back. Okay another great team. Yeah, but that watching those guys leave the Olympics and go on to superstardom. That was what you wanted to see. That's what I want. That's what the The normal trajectory was you look at you go from the 11th to superstardom. Yes, and now it's like we don't even have time know who all made it to the Olympics.


No one knows anymore, you know, but also like the Olympics have gotten I don't know. If you ever saw that movie Icarus. Did you ever see that movie and watching the movie so a documentary The Brian Fogle did on the Olympics. It's a crazy documentary and the the documentary starts out where he's a cyclist and he wanted to do this race and do the race clean and then Get someone to show him how to dope and then do the race doped and see what the difference was. So he does the race clean and then he employs this Russian cat who was responsible for Olympic doping in Russia, and they show he shows him how to do it. Now along the way they find out that there was something at the Sochi Olympics where a lot of the athletes had they had done something where they had built a hole in the Wall, and they had taken the dirty piss snuck in through the hole in the wall.


We replaced it with clean pissed they figure out how to work it. So all these athletes that were supposedly clean. We're on steroid dirty, right? And so it happened in the end. It's so you see that and you realize like what happened to you saying what happened in in the Beijing Olympics? Like it's so politicized. It's become such a big thing for the country that they're willing to do all kinds of shenanigans the with bribe judges like if those judges that Ruled against you weren't bribed. I would be stunned. Of course. They had to be they had to be there's no way. I mean that someone told them to do this. There's no other way that makes any sense now with web but you know, it's a problem. Anyway that amateur sports like one of the things that drives me crazy about the Olympics is how much money it brings in but the athletes don't get any money nut none zero to like college sports a lot like college sports a lot like all sports and college sports even worse maybe right because you can't even they can't even say hey we're going to hook you up with an apartment.


Nothing. You can't say no. Nothing nothing. Yeah, I mean while they're making billions as had that's it's dirty. It's ridiculous. It's really dirty. I mean, I don't know how they should distribute the money but they should distribute the money somehow but I mean come on you want the top athlete to come to your school that that's that's going to add your school's credibility. Then why he have to not be able to make money off of that too. Yeah, and if someone wins the Olympics if they dedicate years of their life for this one goal and they win they should make some fucking money now use a man and got robbed. Robbed and they got nothing food. Yeah, so I got robbed twice. You got double robbed. Literally. I got robbed twice and all the people to put that on they all made a shitload of money.


Yeah, and they do it right now. They're making money off of it right now. Of course, as you know, the Olympics now with no audience because that's a it's a weird thing now with the UFC that's a weird thing now with boxing this these fights with no crowd or very strange. It's very strange to me. I don't know how I mean the crowd meant so much to me. That is like that's why when they moved the fight. I was like, you know what? I don't know y'all give him a chance to go get even more ready. Now when he's the bigger guy and we got no crowd so I can't look over there and see somebody saying yes, go get em champ I'm saying Bhai shut up, you know, I mean so like we have one hype man at least a few of you.


I mean, yeah, I mean, yeah, I got a few of us. Sometimes has the least little thinking get that thing going, you know when you were fighting Um, did you ever looking around alternate really art? Only I will know that you're enjoying yourself. If I'm not giving you something to make you enjoy yourself then wasting your time. I shouldn't be out there. That's how I feel if I don't boxing for you. That's what anything. I'm doing something for you and I'm not making you excited or happy that you're doing it then I'm wasting your time. Hmm. Yeah, well at the end of the day it is an attainment. Yeah that's going fast. So if I entertaining you I'm waste your time. There was a certain important certain time in your career you had to do other shit, too. Take to like you you thought you played basketball basketball game and then fought that night who's ever done that before nobody nobody.


No bad. You mean that was part of the thing you had to do entertain because you were so dominant. Of course, you had to get people to pay attention and different ways about it. Just destroying people you want to make them feel like there's an opera. There's a chance that you giving this guy chance. Yeah. So by paying that basketball game gives him a chance, right cause you know, you got to use your legs to play basketball. Your legs shouldn't be rested like they should be in a 12-round title fight right after the fight. This guy went on to win the Super middleweight title head of three three years. Who was that again are glucose from Canada? Okay headed for three years, but it's a dream fight number this guy after that game after a fight. He went in one the soup WBC super middleweight title and hit up a three years.


It's funny that it still bothers you the people say you didn't fight me, but we're done with the bottom. I'm just saying I should be talking back with us. I got opportunity to augment with a regular Joe Rogan show see on that log would only do you remember when Jordan was was it was it was it hard Fame? What was it with the is when he got up there and he's just talking shit about all the writers and talk shit about it over the years and yeah funny, but I think that for all the greats like to has to be something that's that's pissing you off something that you're fighting against. It can't be there's no way you're going to have peace of mind and still have the drive to succeed and to conquer the way the all-time greats do the all-time greats have to have a chip on their shoulder.


Yeah. If you don't have a chip on your shoulder, then you're not going to be ever reached the Heights or take the measures that it takes to become an all-time. Great. Yeah me I had two chips. They robbed me at the Olympics and I had a father that I separated from the I know in my heart didn't really want me to succeed without him. So those are my chips and because I had those chips. I can't move because if I lose he went hmm, you understand me. So in my Prime I lose he went because he said I can't do it. I can't and in my life the way I was talking I was bought up all I needed God nothing against my dead body needs God. So my to me God prepared you to get me to a certain level, but God took those roosters.


God took a guy named Charlie Kimball and you would know try to camera because he was a boxer back into their amateur boxer, but God showed me so much through Charlie Kimball that to this day. Thea speak to Charlie Kimball because without Charlie Campbell, I might have never gotten to be words on screen really try to Campbell taught me so much about charisma. That my father could never have taught me. That it was unbelievable Charlie Kim a beat all my father's Fighters as amateurs that way in his weight class. Easily almost every time because he had Charisma now they were better than him but he had Charisma and he beat him with that Charisma.


How do you beat him with Charisma? Because he believed in himself. He had confidence and he knew how to do stuff that made me love watching him yells at me and he wasn't the best puncher. He didn't have his boxing skills, but his motions he breathed everything he did even though he was laughing. He has sharp breath with it. No, Jamie. To me I was like, whoa, he beating these guys that Almighty so they learn the same thing. I'm learning but they can't hear that kind of Charisma cause my dad won't allow them to be them people. He won't allow them to perform with that kind of confidence yelled at me. So I didn't know how to do it. He doing because I care what he doing to what we doing now.


I got some how did you incorporate it? Well, I thought doing the stuff. He did a little bit of it Taffy. I got what it really was. Yes, there is still some of the Cretin so in the morning he did while he was fighting to show that he had breath control after I do it. Well, I'm here Bruce Lee Go whoo, tell the camera what do stuff like that and it's not a match nice person wasn't nearly as effective when nearly as effective as the sound was but he kept on beat and in tune with the sound so it made it look way better than he really was and he won two fights against these guys got these guys don't know how Wow, so after I copying some of it not all of it, but I start doing it and it to my stuff when I met him it became hell for all the kids in the area.


Really what Christmas somebody that can teach me and he be my dad if I don't and to me these guys older than me, I'm 12, they 17. He beaten him so they are be better at what we're doing tonight because the older and bigger than me, right, he beat new. No, I got to get that. So I got it. So was it also like you obviously had animosity with your father. There was a dude these so you were looking for other ways to do it, too. No, I had to find other ways. God had to talk to me in other ways. If God is speaking to other ways here. Here's the real deal when people don't understand it's nothing against my father's just kind of out.


Right when I line This Wyatt Earp people that nature is also a Bible right when the lion get a certain age there to kick him out. He got to go. You got to go get your own Pride because this is my part and it's kind of helped me my father. Hmm. So it's like at a young age. I knew I was gonna have to go because just the way things shaped up. You understand me. So me growing up watching even these guys watching for me. I watch all of them get to the age, but my dad would never Block would never allow them to be as confident and as charismatic as Charlie Kimball was because he didn't allowed it because he was a boss. He's the boss. He was in control of everything but he ain't gotta fight nobody right?


So then after the 76 Olympics God gave me a second confirmation Howard Davis jr. Warn the Barry Barker cook. I mean, he was the best friend at the Olympics, but he probably was the only one them gold medalist. They didn't become world champion. Why because it did waiting waiting. Too long. They waited so long that when you find a fault Jim what he couldn't beat him. What because in Howard Davis the fire had died then his daddy if I still was there, but guess what? He didn't got to fight for what right? How does is right? You understand me. That was my second confirmation that when I get old enough, I gotta go. Yeah, you understand me. So it's like I start understanding.


Like I said nature is always in my Bible. So people always say why you love animals. Why you love Second one that's where I learned God's teachings from cause God made those animals and people can't change. Hmm. You understand me you can do to him. But when your new them you came to a whole nother animal right and to me in society. Sometimes that's what they're trying to do to us. They try to neuter us. Yes. So a new to us, we don't fight pick. Well, that's a giant thing with men today. This phone can take that's what toxic masculinity for all that bullshit Porta Potty Time it to the new diverse. Yes when a new turret when you neuter a horse he becomes He again, he owned he'll fight back no more crying. He'll care no more - damn. It was like if you knew that man, he becomes nothing.


He don't care no more. He ain't gonna fight back. He ain't even stand up for herself. Exactly. You ain't got no what God gave you took that out you fear me and to me that's emotionally mentally it would they try to do this without physical doing it. So that was a problem that me and my father also had people say well, why are you so against what's goes on well to me, that's what you tried. But what I learned is and it's going to take you down that road too. I used to hunt when I was a kid, right? We will hunt squirrels will huh squirrel. There'll be some squirrels that would have a penis but no bolts because the other squirrels get their balls off the Dead the daddy did it did happen this about anywhere from ten to twenty five females.


Every time one time have a little babies. He goes bites nuts at all the meals because he want no competition. I don't know. Listen, but you gotta know you gotta know this I get it. So this shows me he can't do it physically, but this way doing I watch them do it to all these other guys. I told you about before me they can't beat Charlie Kimball because they're geldings tell the cameras are stuck. Hey better than them being stronger than he even better punch of them. But in his mind, he's a stud hmm in their minds their killings because my dad is made them. So he admitted beat them down. So low that they have no You'll fight making them but they got to be second to my father first.


I can't be that guy you going to rule the world. You never seen a giving rude word and breeding. You're very young Debbie. I used to swim fast buildings because they just fast naturally and but they're not going through the past because once you cut the balls out of them, he's no more man. Yeah you fear me I did so it's like I've been saying and I was like nothing personal against know about. Okay you do what you want do but for me I couldn't be world champion if I let my father make me a gift. Mentally and emotionally hmm. Yes, damn it. I could not stay there and become a getting like I watched them do before me and expect to be or Jones jr.


That you know today it just couldn't happen. That's a difficult balance with some trainers right? Because some trainers we were Fighters and they're tough guys. Yep, and they don't want to let the other gas to pass them. Yeah. That's a lot of one of the reasons why a lot of Fighters don't make good trainers. And that's why a lot of father-son relationship don't work is vital because just the father don't let the son grow up. And in order to stop it from growing up. You got almost turn him into a gift. Yeah put he'll go for anything and not fight you back usually works out in a weird way. It's very rare that a father-son fight coach combination works lomachenko hit their do a good job. But yeah, well his dad is on.


Usual cat. Yeah, his dad told him you're gonna Just Dance for two years, like what they might have been more than two years if there's god-gifted. Yeah. Well, I like like Joe calzaghe did was he got gifted these guys never boxed but they made world champions at the front but they knew they'd seen on something and I knew what it took to get in there the fact that he told his son to take up Ukrainian dancing and then you look at lomachenko as footwork. It's off the charts. So God gave him a vision. Yeah, of course, I got to wait. We're going he showed him waves going wait for him. He gave my father the same vision just at my father's personality wouldn't allow him to enjoy the fruits of that bitch.


Did you ever resolved it with your father? No, never no. He's still alive. Oh, yeah. Wow, he talked at all. No, damn that's gotta be weird for him. No, it's not weird for me understand. He's a lying. I'm lying. I understand, but that would lying Sons Roy Jones jr. Yeah. He went when you're a boxing trainer and your son's one of the greatest of all time, and he doesn't talk to you that's got to fuck with you. Well, he don't talk to you because you don't want to talk to him, right? So it's not like he don't he wouldn't talk to you if you want to talk to him, but you don't want Talk to him maybe don't talk to him that he's not going to chase you down talk to you. Why would I couldn't me personally as a father? I couldn't I couldn't handle that. I couldn't and I wouldn't have my kids ride.


It may raise my kids the way that I was raised. Yeah. So me all my kids we talk my kids can talk to me about anything. I'm as I'm like you as a father. I couldn't handle that either but sometimes there are sacrifices. But sometimes a guy like you has to come out of a situation like that. You have to fight your way through the struggle of being dominated by your father to become your own. Man, and then that's one of the reasons why you're such a bad motherfucker. If I didn't beat that I never would have made them box. Mmm. Sean O'Grady to take me all the time you did one thing that never could do as well that sure as you can walk away say well, I thought God had me Destiny be great. So I had to walk away and look what I am now. Yeah, if indeed indeed, what does it feel like after like me you've already you're already all-time great you already Hall of Famer and now you're getting back into the ring again.


Like what does that feel? Like is it exciting is it it's a new feeling, you know, right now I got to tell you I'm here. I got to tell him that Go to Roy Jones jr. Rgj Pike store.com to give it straight like nothing but I got it RG fights doing that. Come on missed it ya'll must have forgot my bag. Exactly. So it's like for me it's a whole new game. Now. You gotta do it more promoting stuff. You gotta try to do little bit more media work. I come talk to you cause you always supported me you've been on the best day. It is one of those people that I've ever known as far as being a Roy Jones person. Yeah, I would have came to you if I was doing nothing but having a Mike Tyson fight for us. To talk about yeah, what better time to come see you fear being so they always I've been trying to get him.


I said, I want to wait till we got something interesting to really talk about. Oh, yeah, cuz we good people you are good people. So I wanted something big when I came in now got some so having this Mike Tyson fight. It has its advantages, although it. I told you the timing and all was a disadvantage, but it does have its advantages because now we get to have a great conversation first time with me being here you feeling listen, I appreciate it. I'm happy to talk to you anytime. What is it like though when you see like now Holyfield's thinking about coming back? He's training hard Oscar De La Hoya who that could be a fight for you to like if you decide to keep going with this, that's someone who's more your size as well.


Yeah, he more my size. But I he look at me. Like I look at my he said, you know, he's too big. Well, he fought some middle-aged ready for Bernard are not saying that's not as you see that that's that's that's quite a middleweight. So yeah. You know, they look different than me and they're the different to Mike. It's like when you look at it, the true fact is that if you ask people and you can put a highlights up right now say look at this guy. This guy this guy this guy at the time who they going to get again it will look at Mike Tyson again, they're going to converge on skin and they're going to get Roy Jones again first Converge on do so much crazy stuff that you don't hot in the world. Not only do like you say, it's a basketball game for the fight met them in and read me and bring them to the ring he got Radio City Music Hall me come on where Jones got so much stuff that he gonna win it to be the family of Mike Tyson fight will be right behind him caught my attention that some Knockouts there are unbelievable damn it so it's like that's the two most entertaining guys over the last two decades without a question without a question well you said you learn that move when you put your hands behind your back who do not get when you put your hands behind act now James Oh no you're a good kid yeah you right you right you knock them out you said you learned that from a rooster too that's right that's right who else learn shit from roosters and just for what there's to me but so you gotta understand this Tuesday bit more tick I'm also being on a kung fu movies so the Kung Fu movies where they got tiger style cranes down all these de Toda live with all these different things so I said you know I love you so let me see how I can incorporate the roosters into my style hmm a boxing hmm do you think this is one and done do you think this Tyson fight is one and done does it depend on the outcome You just have to focus on the fight right now.


And then decide what else is going on afterwards. It really depends on how it goes because you know, I'm like this man. I'll I think Mike is awesome person. And I know Mike has had his ups and downs the world. I know Mike is really no he he is Mike you understand me so you don't know what Mike you gonna get, right? Yes dam is holding an exhibition. You got prepare for the best. You can prepare for and Know Anything Could Happen might get you everyone cut you. You on purpose anything can happen you don't know and you try to get it back and they may stop before you get to get him back. Then they say well y'all do a real fight here. Yeah, I wonder if I might get back.


Yes damn if that happened like that. Yeah, I'm standing here. I gotta play that on this a yeah, cause you don't do just one thing. I ain't getting on get back if he's gonna go like that if you don't come from so now if we go, we have a straight up on this time, it's good that I'm cool with that. Maybe the end up we might be it might turn out like I want everything be great. You understand me so much. A great opportunity we both may put up Great Performances and we might call it a date might be too tired to talk about it apples. Call me. Oh, yeah that may happen to but it all really probably depend on the outcome of this. Yes. Damn it because when you smaller guy and you finally got it, you know is over here today and over there tomorrow, then you just got prepare yourself for whatever because you don't know what he may coming in.


Do you? Sammy so I got to be really I mean I feel safe with these earmuffs on comes at me. He might bite you you there. Yeah. That's the thing about my God. You don't know crazy. You don't know while you feel me. You don't know what he might do. I think he's a different human. Now, you know who he was. He's I've talked to him twice on a podcast I talk to him once it was about 10 months ago and wants to just a couple weeks ago and he's two different people from those two x. Okay, that's it. So to Midway doing 10 days. Well 10 months ago. He Smoking weed. He wouldn't even work out. He said he couldn't work out because he didn't want to reignite his ego. And then he said his wife called him fat and then he started working. He said I got on the treadmill started doing it for 15 minutes next thing, you know, it's two hours and then he's obsessed again and that the eagle has been rehired really.


Yes. He says they have me thrown out of War reignited his ego your family. So but they called it an exhibition. Okay. So, yeah. So anyway, he looks shredded. Oh, he is shredded. He's good. He's good. He's good. One right thing called DB. They ain't playing you feel myself understand that doing the right thing. But like I said, everything goes good, then, you know, I will have to do it twice, but if it don't go like I wanted to and they say y'all do a real one thing give me some tea as let's go for real tens. And would you do 10 Rounds not ten or twelve ten or twelve won't work if I can I want I want to see they got me doing eight two minute rounds now, that's a human it right? That's his admitted to everything to his event.


That's to his advantage to Why'd you agree to it? I would at this point. The fans were excited about it. I did I wouldn't want to put put a roof mother fans and they try to stop me right? Yes. Amy sounds like it's not working on things. All right, I'm going through these two ounces that I might figure out a little bit different. I might work a little more no faster than I expected to. Yeah, two minute rounds is different totally different kind of Rhythm totally different kind of Rhythm. Yeah, it's weird that they decided to do it that way. Do you think they decide to do that? We could because the September 12 that date was only six weeks for him to prepare. No did this had this app they just decide to say if week really yeah, they chanced upon me about the week.


So it was originally three-minute rounds. I thought I guess I read the memo roll. Like I said it is it changes too much on me me and me. I mean, I think the WBC came in say they want to put up some kind of title some so they want to cut it back to me around and said something about that or C and Chavez seen you fight Hoppity. They were after the fight and They feel like that's a safety measure but what they don't realize that you keep my fresh it on. You keep my first and more dangerous. That is for me. Yeah, that's why you get Mike unfresh quick so we can get out of this danger zone, but without was shot and Senior hehe, and honestly, I think for a true a true exhibition with head gear big gloves, right but it said they were so exhausted afterwards that they felt like that is what could inhibit somebody's help.


Huh? Well, how much do they train for? For it today. I don't know if you to make the two different things if you're so I don't know why and they could have both like I'm telling them. No, that's not right for me. Because brother smaller guy but hands my best is the best thing I've best component. I right the longer. He goes the more he wears the better my chances are right. Now you keep him strong and fresh the more dangerous it is for me. So they didn't discuss this before hand is not a part of the contract. They just contact you and say they're dropping it down to two minute rounds to the commissioner drop it down to meet around a lot you can do Commission said that God is here the commission you dropped out to being around you can see the pullout or you can fight and it's the commission's idea.


Well, I guess they said BC came in say that along with the commission. So I don't know if it's the commitment towards wcwc told me to commission. So I am just your hoodie. I put my point is that's not good for me. That's good for him again, if you haven't ya already big man, y'all still give him everything he won't. Yeah. I wanted to be three minutes. I don't to be seeming around you think it's safer for me for three minute round. Yeah, it's just better. It's boxing. That's its traditional. It's what it's always been. Guess what though? What they going to do? It's turn that light back on when you turn the light on bad things happen. You're hurt. I heard you and you turn that light back off slowly, but surely they turn that light back on and I'm say I did want to be this person.


But since y'all gonna do me like this y'all start something. that mean trouble Listen, I'm excited about this fight no matter what but now I'm more excited about this is going to be a gigantic fight to I mean, I've heard so many people talk about it that are just casual boxing fans that are excited. I was cool in the beginning. But like I said, once you you can only kick me around so much then the hook comes out I see myself and I'm turning green. Well, you always said that that is like two dudes inside of you, right? There's Roy Jones jr. In his RJ, they start to wake him up.


Well, who's RJ? He didn't want to be left with when did you realize it was like a second person? Well, I've been doing it my whole life. Yeah. I've been doing my whole life. I always try to suppress that person because that person will end up in somebody's paying attention. However, you're watching nothing really think about are caring about what nobody thinks. So is this do you think that this you develop this as a way of it's just always been inside of you or is this how you dealt with certain? The new life wake you had to like shut off parts of Who You Are. I think are real me and have it they just don't ever have to tap into it, but it never had been pushed to that measure which is why I say Society tried to make us geldings because any man like you you got two kids.


Somebody did some to your kid and you saw it Arjun coming up. Hmm. Goddamn, I do feel is always there just that you try to keep it suppressed. So I try to keep suppressed, but you know kick on me with so much. Did he come hmm? It was his dark, um against what he said like a pitbull he has no off switch. Who was it that you fought your father's dude, Jack guys. Shorter guy first type. That's right. That's right. Yep. The second fight Archie came out. Yes way. Yes. That was an annihilation. Of course. Yeah, you just hunt them down. Of course. That's who our G is. Yeah Seek and Destroy doesn't heckles words, simply destroy can destroy it. So the first fight what happened the first fight he got injured no, I He went down on one knee but he's already short right so I couldn't take down so I tap again and I thought everyone say stop all that's right.


That's right. Now wait for references tab. You can see the structure from again. You look at a reference. I was crashing his head face that that's okay. Okay, I'll take that disqualification. But now little bit harder for me when you did they give him the title for yeah, that's right that does. Hey that my first loss if it weren't for that loss. I probably still will have a loss of this. Don't my first loss. Mmm. So that now round Olympics here I go again. So, you know how I feel comes second time, right? Yeah. Now we got robbed twice or three times, but we talked about it a little committed robbery to so now I've been robbed three times that somebody got a day how many times does rj come out in five just that one time just one time it's because he's talk talk crazy to me after I'm no one you get my title while you down face down admit how you can't talk to me like that now and if you left me alone, it wouldn't have came out.


You just left low. Let's go to second fight. I would probably beat him, but I wouldn't even like that because I'm not that dude. I tried to suppress that point that guy you fear me wouldn't start talking now. You make me be a person. I don't want to be and I know I'm glad we friends now. We don't know. We ain't got no beef no more. We cool. Now. We should shake hands. He understands. I understand what it's like at that time. You can't talk when you took my belt while you was facedown met we will talk crazy about me, too. No, no you oh, I've always showed great sportsmanship and and also, Control, I remember when you try to get the referee to stop the pazienza fine.


He will like you looked the referee you like. Come on. Stop it done bro. White what it what it what you want me to do to a referee wouldn't stop it. And then you just finished it real quick. Okay. Yeah. Yeah, it was devastating but that was an excellent example of you being a good Sportsman. I'll call if I don't I don't know. I'm not that I hurt people. Yeah, that's why I try to tell people not to hurt people when you in General McClellan Jeremy Cleland who was at the time I just Destroyer, you know, I mean he was he was the man that people thought of as being like a great Challenger for you and then he had that fight with Nigel been wound up getting brain injury and just devastated and was never the same again. How much did that affect you because their guy who was your peer who was a man that that many people thought was going to be a rival to you and you guys were eventually gonna have a big superfight.


Yeah, how bad did that affect you if it me pretty bad because being that new jail, we were friends and He did game. He won three to split the season of Miniatures. So he's one of them now definitely going to get that one fact, which I got a little bit back when I fought with my sugar in the gym, but I still want to organize organized get that so I was definitely looking to fight him down the road. But when I fight happen when I saw that fight was happening. I was the only person that said that he wouldn't win that fight. I was only person and people called me the next day and said how did you know he's not going and I said because he's good. He's a very strong puncher but punching is all the nights are really has Master does not believe in boxing skills.


Nigel don't care about boxing skills knowledge is just what you say years, but dark destroyer you going to his country. He wanted his backyard and you won't fight him just like he fights. That's not a good. Recipe if you have me hmm and just what either will be I think it's going to be quite dead dead. I think he's going in his career, but I thought that he was going up losing tonight role because of the fact that he will fight the wrong fight. He would fight the style which Nigel shines and only style that magical Shannon when he knocked Nigel down the first round 99% of Fighters would have been done. Yeah, when you sign up through the ropes it looked like it was over and that's what Jarrod was doing it.


Everybody chair was destroying, PA. Provided destroy up here was what a puncher. He wasn't and what a classic Kronk style fighter. He is tall long. Dude. Serious power Super Hyper aggressive both hands, but Nigel Benn could fuckin take it. You know, he almost had to come back recently. Yeah, he did. He had some shoulder injuries and sideline that a bad bad part about it. And this what we said we miss her right now if it was in today's society not to never recovered from that first round like I because today with no crowd he had nothing urgent backup. Home but with that crowd and he at home if he get if he has breath in him. He better get up and get his ass back in the ring.


Yeah. Yeah. He did just didn't survive but the crowd made him do that. Yeah, then when he started taking it to Gerald, I mean that was a crazy Gerald just emptied his gas tank trying to take him out of there. And Jerry was also another guy who caught a tremendous amount of weight. Of course. He Bigfoot little was huge. He probably should have gone up to light heavyweight even before then problems. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that's what most people thought was gonna happen. Yeah. That was that's to me one of the great tragedies of boxing because it's very rare that a an elite top of the food chain world champion is prime is cut down like that. It's really only been a couple instances what it puts people notice again as to why Fighters asked to get paid properly every time they go to ring especially against another Elite fighter.


Yeah, because tomorrow is not promised to nobody when you go in that ring. Anything can happen at any time. Nobody suspected that that would be German cousins last fight ever. Yeah, you understand me know but nobody suspected that's a means to say, what about that with the guy that hit weight that it happened to up in our New York. He fought the Cuban guy Mike. Whatever his name was. I can't remember his last name, but nobody ever suspected that that would be the heavyweights last. I remember that. Yeah. I know. I know the fuck you talking about. I can't remember the name. Yeah, it seems my situation. Yeah, there's it's like you never know. So I'm boxing. You have to take every fight. That's why people say well, why do you say that man? You don't know, you know, you get hit by somebody like Mike Tyson anything and have to write icing is not just an ordinary punch, right?


He one of those guys that could do just that to you. So you should know what you're going into and you should be ready for that because this is Mike. Yeah, you understand me now for me. I would give them a fight for a living. I feel just like a game roof. I'll be with death my spot. So if you want me it's right down my alley. I ain't trippin it all because I know that death is a probability if you're me. So, yeah, that's that could happen to anybody and I know Captain need more going there with somebody too. Dangerous a Mike Tyson problem with me is why I love what I love and why I do what I do is because I love boxing.


So if I got that box it on my dad to me here I'm saving what is that? We the way you'd like to go. Well, I mean with probably won't work with I'd rather go with it where grandpa said I pour you a debate if I will wait. Yeah, but if I went that way, I'm not mad at it. I understand because I know that when I started boxing right, I don't that people get hurt in this. Some people don't make it out of this alive. So if this how you got to go you got a note it but if you ate that game if you ain't that committed to what you're doing, then you shouldn't be talking to me about boxing because that's what boxing is. Yeah, that's a great philosophy to have to go into combat because nobody gets out alive in this life.


Gotta leave some way baby and you want to talk about a man who's been dedicated to a craft and a sport. I mean your whole life has been dedicated to his craft and sport and because of that you are universally recognized as one of the all-time best. Yep, and I can't mom what it is who it is when y'all see this go it's time to go. Yeah, this is a legacy that you've left it like no matter what happens. No one can ever take that away from you. Yep. You've accomplished some crazy shit. Thank you brother. It is what it is. Right your error to men. I mean, there's so many so many amazing fighters of your error. I mean you you really came up and I mean boxing is in a good place.


Now, there's a lot of exciting Champions and a lot of exciting fights to be made but in your era was one of the the golden arrows of boxing. Yeah. Well, you know what, The only thing like I said, what were hurts me now is like I'd be wanting wanting to see the best fighter to fight the best fights like right now a good fight. This on tap is too good fight tanks about to fight a good fight lomachenko by the party really good for ya gotta stand me but the guy his opponent hasn't been proven yet to give him a Lopez but I think he's a really good Prospect and if you get he does get into this fight, it could be really interesting yet at the same time.


Just tell us if it's too early for my life because he still has time to grow he's been in it for he's young but he's a good-looking prospects. If you're me good-looking Prospect. The guy takes fighting is just forgive me. I don't know names. I'll be remember names that we are but he's a pretty good fighter too. And I don't know that he can be a to take tanks power cause tanks one of these guys that comes way down and wait to so he'll be big on right like if he's dead big on Fight Night. It makes it very difficult to take those hammers. I don't think they do. Those when he throws so it's gonna be a good fight to I can't wait to see that but they're they're still fights on tap and I'm looking forward to but I still say that right now the best fighter besides Roy Mike.


Is Crawford versus Spence I get part I agree. Yeah, I just had an amazing not making it happen. I don't know i'mi'm a spends came out of the car accident and faced. So that's that car flip like that you like Jesus Christ. God had to be with something was with him. That's kinda cool right had to be with Honda me something Terence Crawford to me is one of the most interesting Champions alive today beast mode. He think like he thinks like me and Pernell Whitaker thought if you want it Come & Get It Which is stance that's to give me he fights as good from Orthodox as yep, and and when he decides to switch it up on guys, you see the look on their face when they get confused.


Yeah, he'll fight to three rounds one way and they switch it up and you see like, how could you do that? Yeah. It was a fantastic switch one of the best. I've seen the tip profit. Yeah Crawford just he's got a mind for the sport. It's like this you could see when he's putting on a guy. You know, he just he he's as Game as they come. Yes, sir. Yes, sir. So those are fights. I want to see I have some interesting guys. I got a guy could you make jr. Hmm? I really want to see him. I really want to see him with one of the Child o brothers first and when we get that, I think that would be a very good competitive fight your training crispy Chris Eubanks. Yes, and that's where he's at and I think the one of that pipe should fight Canelo but I think I think he's good enough to it.


It's like you can't down a champ. You can't just say, oh he'll beat you have I don't do that in boxing cause Not my thing, but we do want to fight the champ was right now think the WBA Champion little weight is a Japanese guy and we need to fight him to find out get us a real title. Then we should fight the trouble bubble it have a unification title. I'll fire me then he should fight Canelo to find out who the man the weekly this canal going to stay at 68 or is he going to go back and forth between 60 and 75? I think Kendall's gonna go with the money if I did hmm, which is more about put ya know just kind of freelance wrong. He been the I would signify before setting the fire. At 16, I think that's comfortable for him. It's kind of reminds. It kind of reminds me of what I kind of did just dominate the area.


Yeah Stanley. So you get lucky enough to come get high enough in the area here take he's an interesting cat because like what he's learned from like particularly the Floyd Mayweather Jr. Fight if you watch the way he moves now like his head movement is so much better than it ever was before. It's beautiful. His defensive skills are so much better than they've ever been before. Yeah, but to me, that's not the thing that he needed to learn. Cause you have to look at the path to teach you about the future. So if you look at history who your Cesar Chavez senior and God bless the dear Roger Mayweather, but who your beat Roger because he started chasing Roger at the weigh-in.


He didn't wait and try to outbox Roger because he's never going to outbox wragge, right but he's still chasing Roger at the Whitney and Chase Roger all night tear and Roger complete ragged then he would beat rock suppose you Julio. Add that to everybody. Yeah, but no detail. Yeah, but what I'm saying is that's the way to beat a guy who's got a box of the huh. So if you notice then why don't you ii o into Chase floor from round one, right? You don't like that try to outbox Floyd Mayweather. I mean, thanks partner. That's true. Big bite them want. Lll shoot ourselves back to go out. Shoot labored. No, I'm not. No, I'm not. No. I'm not that stupid ever made the best right? No, I understand.


I think he was a little overwhelmed. You know because that was a big fight for him this first real super fight and he's in there with Floyd who's a defensive wizard. Yeah, but you better you've been posting. She was 15. Yeah, so you probably a little bit more experience in floor head time as far as professional boxing goals. So if you really think about it, You don't I'll box the Box didn't Floyd make him suck a lot of weight too. I think you need to get done like 52 or yeah, but he became a Ringette like I think it's 16 pounds heavier than floor. Hmm. So if you 16 pounds heavier than him that tells you that you gotta use that 16 pounds try to use it against me. If you can try not saying that he would be florrick employed as a small Gap Lord knows how to no change of that's a good thing about floor fluid also is in a league fight who knows how to make a chance but for your best for your optimal chances, yeah.


You got to go and get help for round one. Like my daughter did not make it was a my daughter didn't floor the first fight Mmm Yeah gave Mom kind of problem if I could stay right the own it. Yep, and he got a puncher. Yeah, Canelo, you know, he's got his biggest cannolis but my job as a wild man, it don't matter you did. That's the oldest strategy that's only chance candle and then you have one out box for me with her right? Come on over. Yeah the risk losing. That's what I'm saying. He wouldn't read at that point wasn't ready for that. So to say things are better fighter. We could say that but he's an older fighter to so course the older you get the better you supposed to get right but we can't let's hit say he's a better fighter until we see him against a guy like Floyd or these raxiom fix that cause again, he had the same problem with erislandy Lara.


Okay, here's my deal or is he here with floor? Because air is Lawndale our is a box, right? So that fight that fight was a fight that some people thought could have went either way. Yeah. I thought medium one of those like that don't mean you got better. That means that you were facing different types of competition, right? Because until we see you do that and have that style then we say you got better. Yeah. Now he's a great fighter. Don't get me wrong to me here in my top three because I like I love Canelo I think another one the best out there. Yeah, but we can't say we always quick to say he got better for Frank. I'm not going to say that necessary. He got better because you won't get better anyway, right because he's going to grow up what he did. He was 21 and he grew up most people when they grow up they get smaller so you have to get better.


But I don't think the flow of had made it better because he still had didn't show me. They made the necessary adjustment to come back and beat Florida. If you're pointing here or give Florida even better fight if you put him here cause if he depression floor, he's never going to have box, Florida. Hmm. Yeah Styles make fights triumphant. Yeah. What do you did you were you stunned by the kovalev fight? No. I was well with kovalev took the fight at a time. I thought was bad for him because it took it rather one of the other fights. Mmm, and it's like to me. I don't think Colby left took the fight with the intent to win it. I think he felt like I get a chance to fight another I'll get good money. I'll take you think so that's where I felt like really, I don't think I see real covid over me.


Then you try to box Canelo and move where the canibble stalk you but not the way code has awakened little stalked him. It way here. Stop me with the first time. Yeah, because that we had to make beat me with and he turned covid of the crusher turn to a boxer couldn't kovalev. The words always been the drinks too much. I hit that but what I'm saying is covid f your nickname is to crush right? Why don't you let a guy coming up to a classes make you alleviate deviate from where you normally are. You normally call The Crusher now, you can go to the box all of a sudden for a guys come up to a classes. No.


No, yeah, baby. I mean I love couple of to their two daughters my best my boy, you know, I was there but I just feel like he fought the wrong fight against Cano. Yeah. I don't know if he was physically capable fighting any other fight well, but I got this to me is durables used to be I agree with that too. But to me, you must fight the right game plan or you've lost before the fight starts, right? Yeah true. Well, you are fantastic commentator man. That's one of the things they've got. Really bummed out when HBO died. I can't believe they took away boxing that I don't know why HBO did that I just don't understand it. Well and did what they told me was that they don't like the fact they are not going to do something and be number two.


They can't be number one they doing and so I got a I can I can tell him understand it. So what put them in the number two, but obviously they want to be best at was it the zone or was it just have no clue. They want to be number one. I don't want nothing. Well, I mean, I don't know man between you and with Jim lamp and make elements. Kellerman is fantastic. You guys did a nice job on the commentary team was unparalleled about best of the best ever. That's what I'm saying. But like I said, I just feel like maybe they were used to having the elite Champions. And because the leak came from became dispersed.


Maybe that was the I don't know, but to me, I feel like like I said, I thought like the Just want to be or maybe people that bought them out this I don't know. I mean, I don't know either but it's a sad State of Affairs a hurt me. I tell you that it hurt. You still hurts me to this day. That's kind of I mean they have been in boxing for how much dear is the earth me plus years. It hurts me to this day and it's amazing that no one has brought that team back like Max Kellerman to this day is not doing boxing commentary that I'm aware of you do leave it on ESPN. Does he he doesn't look it but who's he? Where's Jim Lee? I don't know but that guy that those two guys or two of the best guys you have can work with and Jim Lampley has a memory that is unparalleled to anybody I've ever met in my life.


This guy can look at the paper one time. I remember that whole damn page almost word for it. I believe it. I mean, I ain't never seen that like my life. No, he is as good a play-by-play commentator as ever lived. Yes, sir. He's phenomenal. HBO was pretty awesome. As an organization because you know, it's like I've built my career there HBO and then to be able to build that commentary career. There was so fabulous for me. So they were really I mean it hurt me bad that they got a box of clothes. That was like man that was really the Kingpin a fox ya know. There were there were uncrowned. I mean, undoubtedly the ones who wore the crown now, do you do any commentary now?


I can't to my contacts over and my contraction over to December. Okay. Yes, we have to do some back and do other comes here. Are you talking to anybody about doing it? I hope you do I have a spoke to them about about it. Yeah, I'm sure after Indians will start speaking to people but I haven't spoke to anybody yet. So, how did you get involved with Russia? How did you become a Russian citizen when I read that I was like what is happening with right? What are you doing? Matt do so much. My partner's got a movie coming out right now that call for Kings me and Mike Tyson in that movie too, but I do so much so I was over at Russia doing fights doing so. Tough and I never realized how big I was entrusted to I start going over there in Russia is like I'm right of 1990s.


Really? Yeah, when I go somewhere, it's all hail the king. That's how I'm walking out. That's how much they love boxing. Wow, so to go to Russia and to see that you love that much as Ben's I hate the cold as big as I hate the cold to be revered that much is always like I tell people I always want to be somewhere that I'm wanted. And need if possible but wanted is to be key and I was till I tell my kids don't date a girl that you won't date a girl that wants you should treat you better smart words right there.


So that's fresh very important love and appreciate me. Hmm now Sammy, do you s appreciate some love me too? Don't get it wrong. No naps in the population of Russia knows me really. Yes. So it's like when they say you should become a part of us too. It's like it's not to say oh, I don't like, you know, it's not like that. It's like why can't we all get along? Why can't we what's the problem? Well, one of the things I was going to say is that you have really taken any grief publicly about being a dual citizen that I've ever seen. No, but there are several restaurants that are dual system. So why would y'all give me grief when I give him grief true? I mean is it we always talk about this racism stuff. Is it okay if I got grief?


What could it be? Because there are several Russians over here in this country right now today. They have dual citizenship so I can't Why can't you that's from saying this whole so how did it come up? Did they they just want up to me? I got bonded to one arrest gap on up to me and say hey, they love you so much so much. You should look at becoming a citizen here to see why it's not a bad idea. I never thought in my life, they will be possible to become a Russian Citizen and an American citizen. I said, well that can't be a bad thing and people forget that we fought together in World War Two. Yes, so it's like we're not really enemies. We enemies sometimes politics try to make us enemies, but we really not And if we all children of God then why are we enemies or how can we read it beginning?


So do you split time in Russia? How much time of the year do you spend there? Are you go by step? How about six months a year? They're really so you do hit that cold. Yeah, I do hate it. I hate it, but I hate it and my Fighters and I meant with meant to mention that I have several titles all over the world to our Russian. Hey, wait, I was Swedish middleweight. I was Swedish coach. I got fighters in South Africa. If I got fighters some everywhere and I got a team here. I got Andrew Glenn of titty bar Chris Eubank Kevin Newman. Let's go Shake him watch him it crumb. I got a lot of good Mike Williams jr.


I got a good stable of young Fighters up-and-coming brand, / LOL things. Last name is Bryant at a really good state of cleaning Heckler Junior really good stable Fighters them kind of work on bringing. Fernando am trying to get them to understand my thought process in boxing because they understand my thought process. They already had a hit on the Kurt. Hmm. They don't understand my thought process right? They're not going away. Right? It was at me. So it's like you have to understand the thought process in order to be able to really pursue a career doing it my way what anything is different about your thought process.


My thought process is summer. Of it is already understood before I go in there. You understand me. So it's like certain things that you do, you know, you have do's and don'ts before you Gordon. You understand me. So it's like when I come out to fight if you got a badge AB, you won't live tonight. You will not win tonight because you're not competing with a bad jail not because it's the first punch you learn it box. If your jab is bad you not be your you understand me. If you can't block the hook. You're not beating Roy. Yes that those things are still before the find out start. I don't care who you are if your Jab Yin complex hook he ain't gonna be so do you think like for young Fighters?


Well, first of all, it's got to be an amazing opportunity to train with an all-time great period to get into your head and did to for you to explain to them how you approach situations how you approach fights how you approach stepping into that ring? How you approach dismantling opponents? That's got to rub off on young kids. Yeah. It does. That's why I try to do some kids get it some kids don't but my goal is to try to get it to all of my kid in all of them head at least start thinking in the right direction because if I can make I'm thinking right direction now I got something. Yes, Timmy. I gotta make them thinking right direction first. See most guys won't contact. You understand me contact is like I got a guy one of my guys are working off and on him James Wilkins, he works harder than everybody if it were but I got to teach him that it's not about how hard you work is house much.


You work hard. Yes. Because water Harbor outsmart you don't get nowhere then you get over train. Yeah, you don't overtrain and you're not getting better because you're not working. Right? So so many boxes have not going to basically strength and conditioning. So my friend Tom you and Keller has started Channel and Tommy and Kevin have a channel and his thing is he teaches boxing is a YouTube channel. Yeah. How do you say his name Tom? Yanqui Low. How do you spell that? Y8. In Kelo, okay, and here's the thing. He has a thing where he started to teach because he realizes they're not lot of coaches left hand box.


So he's teaching boxing the right weight now yes that me and with that being said he's going to help give back to people because if you just go on YouTube and look him up you'll see him, but he got a lot of stuff on me on the right now. There you go again. Okay. I'll see you. They're different, right? Yes. What do you like about those? Well, I can cause they don't hurt your hand. If you're a big puncher like I am you can get over her your handwriting. What would guys holding hands they hurt your hand, but when he gives a lot of not at she teaches a lot he teaches the sport the right way. You understand me. So I like people like him because he doing his thing in the way. It's supposed to be done.


Hmm. Well the beautiful opportunity the people have not learned shit on YouTube. That just was not available before you can spend day after. After day after day watching YouTube videos and instructions and and watching old fights to man. Of course. This is some of the best analogy going to get. Yeah, but having somebody like him is also teaching it helps you a whole lot of all the old Fighters deserve one that really stands out to you that you you enjoyed watching Haley Robinson puddle or do you wanna watch the most part my favorite part of all times Muhammad Ali Muhammad Ali Muhammad Ali she witnessed have those hatches would be my second and third Muhammad Ali XI several centuries and you can mix many can't wait cause I got my top three qualities from those three, would you get from Muhammad Ali how to be a showman and how they have class inside and outside of the ring and how to outthink your opponent with your mind before you beat him with your fist.


Hmm. No one played better mind games and him exactly and he was doing it back when nobody did look Sonny Liston fight it when they literally they wouldn't almost not going to let him fight that he was crazy like, Your harp, but your blood pressure is off the charts, baby every time I've got so hyper before you called. Yeah, but he was when what our unique human being he was about as unique as it gets. I always point the people to I say if you look at Muhammad Ali, you gotta look at Muhammad Ali before they made him take three years off you watch the Cleveland Big Cat Williams fight. I'm like, hey my fucking heavy way that moves like that that Nia now that kind of speed now the kind of footwork. I mean come over to do footwork.


Everything is plenty of past in the middle week literally literally no bullshit literally faster than a middle way and a full-blown heavy weight with length and recheck the power and everything couldn't deal with and then also as a human being outside of the Ring, I mean a cultural Force just a nun. I remember when I was a kid my parents weren't boxing fans at all. But when Muhammad Ali was making that combat fight against Leon Spinks. He lost the Springs the first time and then the second time they're fighting again my Parents watched it. We want to see him win the title back and it wasn't my parents were hippies. Right? They weren't boxing fan. Right but he stood for more than boxing. He stood for what's good in the world?


He's stood for rejecting evil. He stood for there's a man who gave up his career because didn't want to fight in Vietnam because he thought the war was wrong and people don't understand but that's the second reason. I accepted the Russians his ship because Muhammad Ali showed me that we live here as one we should live as individuals. We should live here as one. The batter should be respected looked upon equal. Yes, damn it. And because the Russians did it that's why I accepted what they gave me because they look at me as equal. Not that I'm an athlete nothing more Fox nothing. I'm black but then I'm equal and that they loved what I did they loved what I stood for and they would love to invite me to be a part of their culture as well as heinous things.


That's a beautiful way to look at it up there. That's a you talk about a country that has a great history of Combat Sports. Oh my God. God between wrestling MMA boxing. I mean there's so many of these up-and-coming boxers now that also are these great Fighters that it happened to be Russian, but everything is Karen open that because yeah because of the internet people can now see things differently and you know, you can learn like I said, you can look at this you watch old fights over and over and learn what your favorite fighter did with his attributes were all what you like about it. What made him great that's why I used to look for what made people great like you understand this. Got my left body shot from edible stopping Muhammad back when he was Eddie Gregory.


Oh, wow. Wow, priest speaks. Exactly. Right. Wow, that's why I got my left nipple shot from it is Gregory also noted it will stop mom became a great training together. You better believe it. Wow, that's old school, man. Yes, sir. And I got my defense. He's not could go a whole round. I getting hit from with beneath his best defensive fighter besides bleep you. I think they ever lived it was pretty special. Well, yeah throw Pernell Whitaker that well, he was the defensive too, but he wasn't a defenseless those guys for hmm. Yeah. Yeah, there's I mean there's so many greats to study and learn little bits and pieces from I mean that was one of the big things that Mike Tyson did of course, you know, it's just span of Court giant chunk of his youth watching and let me know and that's what people don't understand about.


Mike is very well versed in boxing. He knows what the hell he's doing. He knows how to solve a puzzle in a Cheering. Yeah, well so than anything else in life, he knows how to solve any other he needs salt in a boxing ring people. Don't give him enough credit for that. No, they don't I mean Mike Tyson is a he's a fascinating human being and his mind is he has things that he focuses on and that's where you find out who he is. Yep. We talked about the things he focuses on because he knows a lot about the things that he pokes exact lot more than you ever take several expect. Yeah. He's he's intense when he Thai when he talks to you about the things that are interesting and important to him you see that intensity that's what it all comes out.


Yeah. Now you're 51 now. Yep. What is the difference between training at 51 than training a 31 after the one you need one or two more days to recover the need a third way don't it hurts. It hurts a little bit longer at 51 then indeed at 31 doing things differently. You got to do things differently. You have to take days off a little bit more frequently you would have wanted to be When you were 31 well said well I didn't eat on days off right all the time at 51. That's about two or three days. You have sale can't even hold up a minute because if you don't then you'll say okay you might want to go but I ain't going today, right? So are you using any technology in terms of like heart rate monitors now, you just going by feel I'm old school.


You know what school you know? Yeah, I do I go by feel. I feel it's day I get it today. I don't feel it today. We're ready to get it tomorrow. Why are you using any new school recovery methods like like a using sauna are using I spun as well the eyes I do like ice I did a couple little things that tried one thing that made me stop. I was doing a thing called protect. I think they said I got stopped comes got something that didn't work. So what is that protects the thing like the giving you is for my needs basically M are supposed to help get the cottage back in my knees. So it wasn't working it was working but this hit Or things in the may not pass the test. If you take it you can't do that no more so I couldn't do it but I really enjoyed it because it made me feel a lot better.


But they say you got to be careful not cause I get something on their midnight some forbidden things. It's called Protec. It's called protect ya see. What is that? Okay, I'm curious about that because my knees are all fucked up. Yeah, and I got a couple people that can help you out with your knees double cause there's another lady down while they have. Dr. Deborah. She can really happen. He's out to she's also cheating. Who gave me a shot with the protect but she has another product that she uses that thing here is made past tense. So I'm not going to take it this Tableau cause I was try Disney's hit the doctor told me that I can't do it again. So I got to stop the what kind of testing are they doing for this fight. They said to do a regular fight testing.


So just like they would do it a normal fight. We're going to get tested as though we are regular athletes as though we're fighting a regular section fight father's aren't meant to my house once father. Yeah, so you can't be need testosterone placement of growth hormone and old peptides no nothing just tell me know the one years of life if you ain't got it in am 51 years of life there too bad you ain't getting it well it certainly helps if you had it never lost it right and we were talking about that before we got here like you never stop moving now don't stop moves that's a good thing for me yeah it's when we were kids and we looked at 51 year olds we thought they was who Paul well your grandfather yeah there were dead they were great grown triple left hook lightning speed and I didn't want no not at 51 yeah so just the days off that's the only thing that's different that's what don't I well I don't go as long when I train what's a what's a typical section for tis a typical session is now 12 to 13 12 maybe 15 rounds Max you Spirits 16 to 24 miles now it's like 12 to 15 x and some of those are low and Peck lousy because you don't want to overdo it Much terribly contenders in your arm again, miss your hands up again.


You don't want to mess nothing up with a fight does not happen. So now do you have a person who's making your schedule or do you do everything yourself? I do a live it up myself. I got a few people to help out know my wife helps out some but she doing her thing with this she wore your brand as well. So she worried I am she worried that come mushy or check. That's what she gave you I have to stuff. Yes. Thank you. So, yeah, if you can pull it up I am she worried that come. So she helps you put your schedule together as well and put my kids together and she trains for us every day. Really? Wow. Yeah, so so good. But yeah, we don't do this right here. Yeah, that's what I'm trying to get you Embrace every challenge as a strong Confident Woman you are yeah.


Yeah. Now what about when you were briefly talking about strength and conditioning do you do strength and conditioning likely see a lot of these Fighters are doing like this circuit training. Hi. Density, you know, like kettlebells. Yeah do a little bit and do a little bit late, but I don't make that vital part of my workout. I can even do it in the mornings like three or four days a week all that freedom Leaf usually brings this guy over we go to work. We do like three four days a week and we don't make that a priority because I'm not a weightlifter football player a boxer right so boxing skills deal.


She have to be depowered you want to be in shape to but don't mistake Fitness over boxing skills. Some people not prefer Fitness Brian old boxing skill, but we weren't together his boxing skills and a little bit of Fitness. He going to beat you. Yeah, the most important thing is efficiency and in skill and on. Yeah did that, but how did that From where this thing got confused that way. Well, I think what really happened is a lot of the corners started picking up a little bit about boxing skills to and they were always super fit but didn't have boxing skills that they had internet they can get the boxing skills. So they can pick up one or two little tricks put it with that condition and you can get beat all digging through this all night.


Well when you see a guy who's like super strong and super fit and dominates people with that it tempts people in there. Looks more like Archer bitter beauty. Is that correct? Super-strong got my fucking tank of killer bees as you say. I love watch that guy fight. Well, he's been down twice to do ya see how he gets a warm. Yeah. He gets him Wars but that fucking guy Seek and Destroy. Well, it's gonna be one of the strongest power punches I've ever seen ever. I mean I'm a giant fan of his and I love watching these fights because that's what you're going to get. You're going to get seeking. Every fight SE the problem is in our country.


We don't we not open-minded enough to be able to see good fights no matter what race they are because if you think about it Arthur did it be of and be bald to meet you be ball will be a sugary little tie my hair type fight right now right now me because there is look at that motherfucker. He's so jacked guys can't freaking punch and they both carry, but if you mean yeah, it's my just think People maybe don't have the understanding and appreciation of boxing as a whole as they used to back in your day. I would quote we more close-minded. Yeah. Well, it's just it's unfortunate because he's I think he's like 37 now.


So he's you know, he isn't it. Yeah later stages of his life. He's in his prime still but he's like that outside edges. How old is he 35? Well, it's not that bad. So but still, you know really from 35 on. As when unless you Bernard Hopkins ha ha ha fucking that guy man. Whoo, and again, but that guy speaks to discipline and boxing skill right of me. That's what led Bernard Hopkins has left alone. Boxing skills. Not not not just the strength and conditioning but boxing skills along with yes. I remember back when he's the Executioner when he fought Felix Trinidad people are already counting them out there like he's too old and you think about he knocked.


Outfields turns out I say I want to say he was like 36 back then and that was just the beginning that was the beginning of me. He went on to have this incredible career post 36 and he won't tell nobody the truth ever, but it came to Pensacola before he did that and asked me what should he do now because he didn't want to fight me again to in a sense, but it wasn't really the money that he wanted. So I told him listen you could be all the small guys go down one to fight for this channel day. I still always in the world being Pick up and you kissed someone and he did exactly that. Yeah, I know he went over to them by the truth that I told him that but I did and I ain't got no reason to lie to you. I did just like I told Tyson Fury that if he just took five years of his life and dedicated back to boxing.


He'd beat the majority of the hip ways after the did because the ones that are on top mentally he can beat them. He's mentally better than most of them, but he got to dedicate itself to the sport. Where you at right now. Well, it's funny that you know when you Talk to Tyson Fury his father told him to not take the first Deontay Wilder fight. He said you're not ready. He said you haven't fully recovered physically from all the years of drinking and abuse. He's put on his body. He just you know after he beat Wladimir Klitschko and won the title, he kind of went crazy for a while and was open about that about his issues with alcoholism and Mental Illness, but his father was like you haven't come back yet. You're not all the way back, right?


So they have that fight fight ends in a Crazy fight and then the rematch Jesus Christ. It was like the seeing him take it to Deontay Wilder. You want to talk about a hard puncher Deontay Wilder is one of the freakiest punches I've ever seen in my life Yankee. Yeah Ricky power with the right hand especially. Yeah freaky when he knocked out our T's without right hand to the forehead just flatlined them. He was like what in the fuck just happened? He just crazy power but Tyson Fury's boxing skill his boxing skills and the fact that he started training with Sugar Hill Croc fighter before that Kronk trainer and had that super aggressive Fate In Your Face style and just really use those boxing skills and got super aggressive in the rematch and had Deonte on the back heel.


That's the main thing and when you not as powerful as the Deonte, you have to think of other ways to do it and the fact that when they fight Tyson Fury say they haven't we Co then that pattern down right through the here they gotta punch up right that takes a lot of power away from those good right hand punches Soul if you have a good Joe Frazier type George Foreman time hook or King Lord and tape hook then you won't be in trouble if you got to punch up here, right? The hook is deadly up here but the right hand going up here takes a little bit off of it and this is the law of gravity. If you don't know that there's something wrong with I was just amazed if he got up and after the 12th round the first fight was to actually was 20. Know what a Crusher Deontay is and the fact he went right hand and then left hook on the way down and then went like this because like it's over and that's what really shocked him to mow that put him in a State of shock for Fury to come off that floor.


Yeah, come back the way you did and come back and win the rest of the round. He'd never had nobody to do that to him before his life. I guarantee no guarantee. I couldn't believe he did it guaranteed. Never had nobody his life to do him. Like Tyson Fury did that in his life. I think that's one of the greatest comebacks. Ex ever in a round without a quest to have him flat like I thought it was over. Yeah, I remember watching at home. I went on the front of my bed going on. Oh 12th round stopped him in the 12th round and Deonte 209 pounds without fire up, which is crazy. Yep. I mean he about as light as anyone who's ever fought for the title and and been a title has been a title holder.


And then also you think about how many fights he won by KO. He won all his fights by killed him. One but then I heard him though because he never had the Box. Hmm. So now he don't know how to box and go that way he'll know. I mean no go this way. Rhinos had to go this way right now that that box over there right there heard him when he met somebody that can fight going both ways. Right? So first we tizen for your party going like this second way times of Fear Part of War like this straight for ya. Yeah, would you what advice would you give Deonte like if he came to you if he's listening this because I've heard that Floyd is interested in training him. But if he came to you, what advice would you give to him? Well we go back to learn how you got out of jail and developing our left hand because once we develop the left hand right hand already left, we don't need that operate with developing that left hand.


We develop the left hand make it become a weapon before the right hand. Now it's hard to be the left hand we had right to it. We all stop. Hmm. So that was you would concentrate on left right away right away. How much time would you give If you said like if we have all the time in the world, it's up to you to pick when the next fight is. How much time would you like to see him spend working on something like that 6 months 6 months 6 months and nobody would be able again they have a hard time beating again. I say but it took him six months. Would you want him what would you want them to do with his footwork? Because one of the things about Deonte is he throws everything into his punches and sometimes and that's what would change I would focus on the left hand more the left hand right now.


He'll think is a kid. And he throws a jab with it, but he looking to kill two right here, right? We got to become you got to make him diverts. You got to be the killed left or the right and you gotta make everything used as a unit. He had make him use everything as a unit if your mom use everything as a unit and it's not good for him. So the focus on one punch kind of takes everything else out the game that one Parts don't work what we gonna do now now in his struggles with backing up and moving back, what would you have them do with that? Would you have him concentrate on cutting angles know? I'm right? We know how to fix that too. But that's part of that jab, right, you know is how we use the left hand. They left hand go allowed to go in every direction where we need to but the left hand is most important left hand and feet as defense.


Now. Do you ever reach out to Fighters? Like you see a fire like that have a loss. No now after all of that I have tried to reach out to was I forget the guys name the north with a Norris was about to fight lomachenko because I know it will be a good fight and I was gonna reach out to him but he has transfer I didn't reach out to him. But I would if he would ask I would have accepted that because that's a hard fight him to fight and I know Dinars he's a good guy, but he have a chance to win the fight. But the way they train in the fight took all of the way. Hmm. Yeah. It sucks. It's interesting because you as a multiple Division World Champion, but also a And tater when you were doing it for HBO, you could point out little things right away.


Yeah, did you ever have Fighters come up to you? And thank you for pointing. Thank me. Tell me what I told him to hold me tell me what I said. They need to get better at Timmy. I made him a better fighter that they listed the commentary saw the mistakes that they were making so often I can look at again breaking down right away. It's also gotta be crazy for a fighter to be fighting and I mean, I know there's a giant amount of them that were huge Roy Jones jr. Fans and now they're looking over your You're talking about them while they're fighting that's got to be a trip. My guy Andrew. I think is Andrew Murphy Live Nation Aang last name it but Andrew he always says they said I'm so amazed deal that I'm here taking instructions from you. Yes, Amy Bryant says it too. So it's just they always they happy dude to be there.


So I got another kid named walked up guy from Mobile, Alabama, so and wailing wailing my next-door neighbor 15 years old. He's going to be a banger to so but they love taking instruction for me. I enjoy it so much. I'll do it. Well, it's obvious that you enjoy it and for them. That's first of all, it's an amazing honor for them. But also it's got to be so motivational. Yeah, you know it is and I think for them to really see me still getting active at 51 that is like wow. He still does it like that. So now we understand what he's saying because how can we be slower than him? He's 51 and we can't do it that fast so we got problems. Yes. Y'all got major issues like yeah.


Well, it's just beautiful to see how much energy how much enthusiasm you have and that's that's really what life's all about. Right if it is meant by having energy being a positive force in the world and just helping other people, you know, you do that you're doing the right thing. If you're not doing it, then you almost wasting time because why did God give you life? You never hear from this person? Beautiful. I love it. Roy Jones jr. November 28th. I'm gonna be watching. I think I'm going to be there. That's all the good that I hope. You know, I think I'm not allowed to go if I just have to take a covid test and I could sit I really That would love you to be there. I'm almost on your YouTube channel two Souls. Hope you look out for me. Let me know what that is. And I will promote that for you. I'll let everybody know and I'll be back on his old. Let's do it.


Thank you, sir. Thank you very much. Thank you Roy Jones jr. Yeah, thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to Simply Safe head on over to Simply Save.com Rogan and get a free HD camera for listeners this podcast. That's SI MPL is a fe simply saved. Cam Rogan go there and make sure that they know that we sent you. We're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash out. That's right. The number one app in finance in the known universe the very best application for finance the best the world's ever known and when you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today, make sure you use the referral code Joe Rogan all one word.


You do that you will receive ten dollars and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend. Justin Brands fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo. It's a no-brainer you get something awesome and something awesome goes to an amazing cause we're also brought to you by whoop. The best fitness tracker I've ever used. I wear it 24/7 it gives you personalized data to help you understand. Better optimize your behavior. And for anybody looking to build healthier smarter habits. Whoop is a no-brainer and listeners is podcast. We're going to get the Hook-Up Loop is going to give you 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout go to whoop.


That's wh oop.com enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15% get to know yourself on a deeper level unlock yourself with whoop, and we're brought to you by CB D MD and they're fantastic CBD oils and tinctures. And topicals I love their products and to make it even easier for you to try them out CBD MD is going to hook up JRE lister's with 25 percent off your next order when you use the promo code Rogan at checkout. So once again, let's see BDM d.com use the promo code Rogan for 25% off your purchase of their Superior CBD products from CB D MZ my friends.


Thank you so much for tuning in much. Love to you all.