
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by whoop. I wear a loop strap 24/7. It's a fantastic fitness trainer the best one I've ever used and it's very important this month because it's sober October. That's right kids. I'm in no booze. No pot. No nothing for the whole month and I'm working out every single day and to help keep track of my body I use whoop. Whoop is a 24/7. In personalized Fitness tracker, it's the best and it tracks whether you're getting enough sleep. If you recovered how much strain you're putting on your body. You can even track how your body reacts on days you do or don't drink or take caffeine or take CBD you can get insights and how it impacts your sleep performance and your recovery.


Again, this is the very best fitness tracker I have ever used. It doesn't just track calories and steps. Monitor, sleep it monitors your heart rate and it works off of heart rate variability monitors your recovery respiratory rate. It's awesome. It provides real insights in real time by quantifying data and helping you better understand your body on a deeper level. I fucking love it and it's one of the big reasons why I recommend it to anybody doing sober October or anybody trying to build better healthier habits. I wear it all year round. It's just fucking fantastic. I love the fact that I A cup in the morning and I could see in real data how well I've slept and whether or not I've recovered.


Well, it's just the best thing that I've ever found to make me accountable for my behavior really tracks exactly how much sleep I got. It's fantastic and it lets you know, whether or not like sometimes like oh, I'm feeling kind of down I look at my web shop and I look at my application the whoop app is like now you're good to go. Dude. Stop being a baby. Or sometimes it tells you hey, you're a little overworked. Maybe maybe chill out. Maybe do a little, you know little active recovery and for listeners of this podcast. Whoop is going to offer you 15% off all their amazing products. So head over to whoop. That's wh oop whoop.com enter the code Rogan Ro Gan at checkout and save 15% off.


Don't forget to join me and whoop this sober October as we sleep better. Over faster and train smarter and stay sober that's woop woop.com and use the code word Rogan. We are also brought to you by manscaped keeping your balls fresh and clean. We manscaped has the very best ball shaver that I've ever used. I used to use a regular razor. The one I use in my head for the balls and electric one and it was a hair-raising experience. It's dangerous one. I would scratch myself Nick myself and cut the old ball bag.


Not good. Well manscaped has a performance package, which is the ultimate men's hygiene bundle included in this new package is the weed wacker nose and ear hair trimmer, which is waterproof and used a uses a 9000 RPM Motor powered 360 degree rotary dual blade system the nose. And ear hair trimmer provides proprietary skin safe technology which helps prevent Nick snags and tugs on those delicate little holes and their lawn mower the lawn mower 3.0 trimmer, which is the best ball hair trimmer on the planet Earth.


I've used a bunch of them. There's no question. This is the best but you don't just use it for your balls. You can use it for your but if you one of those guys use it for your body do whatever you want. I've used it on my but I'm gonna I'm not gonna lie to you keeps it clean and it changes the sound of your farts, which is very weird. And don't forget use their famous liquid formulations like the crop preserver, which is a ball deodorant and crop reviver ball toner to maximize your ball hygiene routine. So get the performance package now to receive the two free gifts manscape boxers end the shed travel bag. Also you receive a replaceable blade every three months to keep Weed whacking and lawn mowing time clean and enjoyable.


So the performance package is the best value that manscaped has to offer and you can get 20% off plus free shipping at manscaped.com Rogan. So to get 20% off and free shipping at manscape.com Rogan again. That's 20% off free shipping. Manscape.com Rogan. What are you waiting for? Go? Whack your weeds. That's that's there. The words they have fun. It's fun. But it really does work. It's there's no doubt. It's the best it's worth it if you shave your balls and believe me, you should get yourself one. We're also brought to you by butcher box butcher box makes it easy to get high-quality humanely raised meat that you can trust they deliver 100% grass-fed grass-finished beef free range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood directly to your door.


It's a As to accompany when you become a member, you're joining a community that's focused on doing what's better for all and that means caring about the lives of animals the livelihoods of farmers and treating our planet with respect and enjoying better meals together. It is an awesome company and they deliver 100% grass-fed grass-finished beef which is my personal favorite and you can choose what you want. They have all sorts of box options and delivery options. You can choose the frequency they offer five boxes. As you can get for curated box options as well as the popular custom box. So you get exactly what you and your family love and for me that's grass-fed grass-finished Ribeyes.


I love them. They're delicious. And for the quality that you're going to get from butcher box. I mean, it's it would you would be very hard-pressed to find this quality at this price anywhere anywhere else and they have free shipping and they vacuum seal it at the peak of freshness. It's a it's an amazing company all their cattle. Has room to graze their all hundred percent grass-fed and free to roam on the pasture. They raise their hogs on pasture or hoop Barnes free to do what hogs do it ensures that their chickens have outdoor access no cages no crates. No crowding butcher box is proud to partner with people who believe in better honoring nature animals in the land.


They uphold strict fishing and handling practices when it comes to wild caught sustainably harvested seafood and they make sure that you're feeding your family with the very best that nature provides and for a limited time new members can get two lobster tails and to filet mignons for free when you sign up for butcher Box by going to butcher box.com Rogan. That's butcher box.com Rogan to get to 5 ounce lobster tails and to filet mignons in your first order who's uh, we are also brought to you by force. Big Matic for Sig mattock and they're delicious and nutritious mushroom coffee with lion's mane.


It is a fantastic option instead of just regular coffee mushroom coffees more than just regular coffee. It has lion's mane in it, which is my favorite mushroom. It supports productivity and creativity fantastic for your brain and it includes chaga the king of mushrooms for immune support and it here's a big question. Does it taste like mushrooms know? Does not taste like regular coffee, it's great. Mushroom coffee is also easier in the gut. It doesn't make you feel jittery or crash and all four Sig Matic products or organic vegan and gluten-free. Every single batch is tested in a third party lab for heavy metals allergens bad bacteria yeast Moulds mycotoxins and pesticides to ensure their purity and safety so that you know, you are getting the highest quality coffee and shrooms possible and best of all forces.


Matt extends behind their products unconditionally with a 100% money back guarantee love every sip or get your money back and they're gonna hook you up. They got an exclusive order for Symantec has a great offer on their best-selling lion's mane coffee that is just for JRE listeners. You can receive up to 40% off on their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim this deal. You must go to for Sigma attic.com / Rogan. Again, this offer is only for Jerry listeners. It's not available in the regular website. Go to fo you are SI G. M-- ATI c.com Rogan and get yourself some delicious and nutritious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out Tada.


My guest today is one of the best stand-up comedians alive today not to one of the best to ever do it. I love him. He's the former host of tough crowd. And the author of a new book called overstated A Coast-to-Coast roast of the 50 states. He is the Great and Powerful Colin Quinn. The Joe Rogan Experience joined by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day to get you on this podcast. I tried forever to get you in ela. You said no chance now true. Okay. I've every time we see each other we just yeah, I was like, yeah, I'll get out there one of those days.


I'm glad I waited this long. It's kind of a I can save her. I can appreciate it. I'm savoring it right now. If I was almost the first podcast be like, yeah, I was on Jose and I was on this one. This is like, you know, you getting you getting the respect you deserve now, I see what is it like in the lockdown for you? Still living in New York. Yeah. I live in New York so weird. Yeah. I mean, it's I was telling everybody it's you know, it's it's very it's not like do people like I was like New York in the 70s now the 70s was a whole different vibe and but now it's all boarded up stores the store my corner like the corner Bodega basically just closed and it was a you know, it was around for a long time.


And you know, it's depressing Like You on the subway. There's only a few people on and it still smelled it smells has They've been cleaning it every day and still stinks. It doesn't even smell better. That's how ingrained it is. And you know, the pigeons are homeless because antifa took down all the statues so they have no place to live and yeah, it's a very say it's a very weird place. You can't say it like people that say it's like the 70s like know the 70s. It was like it was the 50s in the 60s and the 70s like it didn't change much. It was CD and weird and but it was always like that. This is our drastic change from six months ago. You can't say it's like the 70s because it's not it's like a some things deteriorated.


There's a collapse right? Then there's all this weirdness that comes along with that. Well, the 70s was kind of a collapse that was a different type. So like in the 70s all the stores at night would be locked up, but they will open during the day so at night if anybody's out of tonight at nine that was on them, but I mean, but it was not like now it's just 24 you walk in that deserted streets is nobody out. Out in animated. Have you always lived in New York pressing? Yeah, so so it was sketchy in the 70s. Oh my God. Yeah. I mean I did a whole I did a whole show about it basically, but I mean it was basically like important one of the jokes for my own New York story was that it wasn't a joke. It was if you walk down your block because there's no cell phone. So if you walk down the block from the train after 9:00 at night people would lean out the window and be like genuinely surprised like good for you.


You made it home if you say that if they're not like Times Square People would go to Broadway shows by 11 o'clock. It was deserted except for criminals because people would leave were each other wouldn't go out for a drink with dinner. They would get in a car and get out immediately and Juliana is the one who cleaned all that shit up Giuliani cleaned up here and then amazing. This guy gets no respect now now I know you know, he went a little crazy, but he really he he did what no politician is ever done in any in history, which is he said I'm going to transform this and he did he turned it around. Yeah. Really? Did you really did maybe a little too far like it's her may have been a little too far like where it became like a mall.


Yes Times Square is very uninspiring to became like a big Applebee's but that's yeah, that's exactly that's exactly what it's like and you know, even though like now I look back and I'm like, oh Taxi Driver New York. It was edgy. It was fun. But at the time it was no joke people, you know, I glamorize it through rose-colored glasses, but it was serious. Yes anything about crime and crime ridden areas. It's like people always glamorize it after the fact but if you're living there while it's going down, it's fucking terrible. Yeah. Yeah, I mean most people love New York. Once he took over the 90s people forget that yeah that everything's just like I can go out at night like it work. I can in a Min before that. It was it was crazy and I used to bartend around Times Square and I mean the stuff you saw it, you know was just brutal and I mean, well one of the things were finding out from this lockdowns that it really is important who your mayor is.


Yeah. It's to be important. Didn't really care people didn't care where the mayor of La was half. The people don't even know that's right. And now the like, who is this motherfucker? That's keeping everything closed. Yeah. Yeah and the same thing with New York. Oh, yeah. Well, we blahs Blasio from day one a lot of people I guess and now everybody hates him but this is his second term. Yes, he got re-elected. Oh, he swept both elections. That's hilarious. You know, and now we're finding out. Yeah. Oh, he's a dipshit. Yeah just took a took something. Whereas a crisis where you realize like. This is not a leader and it He hated Bloomberg for running third time. They wish they had him for fifth now. Yeah, members are guys force of those were over the moon for third nobody misses, you know guy like him.


Could he go back Kitty run again? Because he can't be president. I don't know but I don't know he was so terrible in the debate. It's so funny because the thing about Bloomberg that disappointed me is present was when he was mayor when he first got elected mayor. I was Darrell Hammond had to bail on some show we supposed to do so at the last minute they ask Me to do a favor do a guest shot at the show, which I go up really didn't go that well, but it was you know, I did when he was asked me what kind of show what was a stand-up show but it was no he's right show for Bloomberg via Bloomberg was trying to get the the Olympics here or something. The only idea was the Olympics. So he asked me to you know, their house was he showed he had something else so I ran over and I lived in Midtown.


I ran over literally ran over did the show in front of the Olympic Committee. Oh, whatever the committee was. I think it was Olympics. He had 30 people in his uncomfortable room. And then after its Bloomberg shook my hand and I knew it was already a billionaire and he goes I owe you one I go. Thanks. Thanks. You guys. No, no. No, I don't you say that. I always repay my debts I owe you one. So I was kind of hoping to be president and then I could call in my chit because I never did the whole time was mayor unless he was busy. I'll let it slide but he still owes you though, huh? Yeah got it on a ledger somewhere. No, but I just have my oral. I believe in the or I know your history. Oh, yeah. I mean I I thought it came right out didn't ya? Yeah, not my God it. Oh, yeah, so maybe if he comes back, can you become mayor again?


How's that work can be president again? Can you be mayor again? I guess you can. Yeah. Why not? Just let me know Laura. Well Governor California that Jerry Brown guy he became Governor again. That's right. Yeah. So if you can be Governor, you've got to be made like he was governor in like the 90s like the early 90s. I think I I think in the 80s because I think Johnny cost you to make those jokes for smoking crack didn't he went DC for being mayor. Yep. Yeah right now yeah Marion Barry. Yeah. I wonder how many terms he did that like wonder if there's like a limit on how many terms you could be your more politically minded than I am. Like do you not know that kind of stuff though know how many terms can you be a mayor because someone like Bloomberg has got to come back in and clean New York City up because it's you're not going to get there with this social justice Warrior and to the de Blasio has it's just going to lead to more complete deterioration of that City.


Yeah, but it may be too late. You never know too late. Wait, you never know. I mean nobody likes to think of New York that way, but it's like a lot of people so many people move to that. I was shocked moved to the suburbs that I was like. Wow. This is serious. Like I didn't really believe it just do them. So New York, like I just I don't even think in terms of leaving New York, even even though you know, it's radically changed to me before any of this happened. But so many people moved out. I was like, this is getting serious. What did you think about that altered? Sure Jerry Seinfeld will Feud about New York is dead fuck. You know, it's yeah, I mean look you can argue either side of it and then right in and I mean like I don't want it to be dead.


But at the same time we're not going to pretend it's not in deep trouble. Yeah. So I mean, I don't know how it gets out. That's what my worry is. I know unless covid gets cured and then Ari shaffir things artists are going to start moving in again, but that's he's one of those guys right? He's got that, you know, could you need to be gritty New York City needs to be graded, right? And now guys, yeah, but ever been mugged that's why I never really had the fuck beat out of them. You do need a couple of those in life is need to know that it's possible to be like, wow. What is gritty mean to you tell you it's it ain't a fucking it's not Midnight Cowboy. That's a movie. Yeah real gritty as you get stabbed and then it gets infected.


Yeah when you're in the hospital for six months. Yeah, you need to at least ever had had regretted laughing because you're holding your broken rib. For six weeks in a row we like this is ever gonna get better. Yeah. It's that gritty shit is like boy. Yeah. I see what you're saying. I kind of get I know yeah some places that a gritty their fun yet. No, it's fun. And like I said when I'm watching taxi driver, I'm like, yeah, I miss New York, but I mean, I would walk I remember walking through Times Square. We don't have to ask what I was doing it at 12 o'clock at night by myself 1980-81 and literally they had like Steve's dens above the porno theaters.


They had thieves dens. So like they go through the heddle turnstile. I went in one once with this kid. He was taking me if I forget what we're trying to do something Shady. I'm sure and he went we went up and it was like 50 like thieves like like like Oliver only New York, but uh, like a gang of people with illegal Goods trading illegal goes right above on 42nd Street who's crazy. So you take gangs running down if Anybody was they just swarm somebody take their stuff leave them on the ground and just keep going the thing about it is though the disrespect to the police right now, right? It leads it to a very difficult situation of trying to bring it back.


It's like that didn't that wasn't the case in the 80s and 90s people respected the police like when they when Giuliani brought it back there wasn't this overall Nationwide resentment of the police force like we're having now which is pretty unprecedented. Well, I mean they're short of was in New York actually at that time there's a couple of incidents where you know, but yes not like this does not so different a luxury that people will able to indulge themselves by by putting all you know, lightning rod sort of you know what I mean, like the police to me. It's like a proxy war. You know what I mean? Everybody knows cops. Everything was cups of nuts. We all had the friend that you grew up with you like whatever happened to him. He became a cop he became a comp but but no one denies that part I'm even cop.


Know that yeah about themselves but that being said it's easy for everybody to just go. Okay, like as a proxy war so all the bottled up racial resentment in the country and it's like the people that have to actually go and say Hey, listen, here's what has to happen. They're going to be the they're going to be the Fall Guy for that and that's you know, I mean, that's what this is in my opinion. Well, you know what it is. It's like social media only captures the things that are viral right with the things you going to watch are only going to be viral and the ones that go viral. The ones that are really bad. Yeah, I mean nobody wants to see note. There's no viral videos of a cop pulling a guy over and having a laugh with them. And so listen Maggie going 63 and a 55 just do me a favor slow down.


All right, sir, big fan of police. Thank you, sir. I appreciate you. Appreciate shake your hand. Bye. Take care. No you instead you have some asshole grabbing some black woman and pulling her out of the car body slamming or any of these motherfuckers it keep doing this right, but you can have millions of interactions. With cops. Yeah, and you're only going to see one and you decide that all cops are pieces of shit, when there's these hundreds of thousands of cops are great guys, there is doing a really difficult job and trying to keep it together but one or two a week. Yeah is going to go bad and that's all you need to know and everybody thinks that the world is falling apart because you see those videos and those videos get two three four my five million downloads and and everybody just thinks that all cops are terrible people and it's just it's not the case right know exactly.


But try telling people that and they think you're a cop apologist. They say you're a piece of shit. Yeah, you're white supremacist. Right? Right, right. Yeah stand down and stand by what rough is that tell the white supremacist to stand down and stand by and it's one of those moments where you're like, you know, it's basically the like the one thing you wouldn't it must be like not like Nero fiddling while Rome Burns. I feel like it's when all the Roman senate is going to what To do now Nero and he starts taking the fiddle out of vacation like no he's not going to fucking is he gonna fiddle right now? This is really fitting right? But he did you were saying earlier. We were talking outside that he just called the KKK.


What did he just I didn't say that somebody else both somebody else was out there saying that he called him a terrorist group right didn't didn't he say that like, I don't know is that the case Jamie someone out there was saying some of them a lot. I forget who said it. He called the KKK a terrorist group like the week before or label them at was that true. I don't know. We're doing it that way is correct. I don't think he called them that let's see what he said again. He didn't he didn't call them at the White House labeled by the White House labeled him a terrorist. He didn't say it somewhere whatever right but that opportunity. It was so funny. Like he's telling Joe Biden but I want you to say Law and Order. You can't even write you can't even said he didn't say it. Right and then he said, you know, I want you to denounce white supremacy.


And then Chris Wallace like mr. President. Do you denounce white supremacy? I tell them to stand down and stand by like Can I go people that were strategist public? What the fuck? He's like? Okay. Well you say why he's like, whoa. Hey, come on. There we go. Thank you. What about you have to do is say yes, I denounce white supremacy of God tell you to say see but that's why you should be moderating this debate because you could be physically grabbing both of them and saying listen here's what's going to happen now instead Chris Wallace, like, excuse me guys what I mean is that he need Alpha you have to be able to To physically walk up to the podiums and put people that's why I was saying they don't want Big John McCarthy.


They need the UFC referee Big John McCarthy the fat diet, dude. He can handle that shit. He would tell people to sit the fuck down. He was a cop. Yeah, he knows how to like control. I would be laughing the problem with me. I'd be like, oh my God, what a shit show. I would turn to the camera. I break the wall. I believe ladies and gentlemen. Yeah, you just got a real fucking problem. And yeah folks you may want to tap out on this country. Yeah, like Jesus can't Look so bad right now. Yeah, I know that Justin Trudeau's kind of a pussy, but they said a lot of what do you mean? He's a boxer was he? Yeah. All right was I played basketball couple times? I don't call myself a basketball player. Well, maybe he's the kind of boxer with it. Like Hey, listen, that's the prime minister's son.


So if he hits you just flinched don't Hello one of those. Yeah, there's a lot of that going on. I've seen that before. No, I'm sure he actually I did too. He did have a boxing match. He's a little too handsome for my taste. Yeah. I don't like it either beautiful man. Did blackface at least 30 or 40 times right at me and kind of it's different. They really took Indian people or something. Well, that's not always right black is like brownish. Yes. It's indigenous face. Yeah, it is kind of funny like white relations. Why faces like no problem at all, right. Good luck. Yeah. You could be white face. No one cares. Can you play a redhead? If you're not a redhead? Is there any shame in that? Well, would you want to is the first question but second of all if someone that's like the Andrew No story but I don't know Andrew Santino's it coming Miguel are very funny.


Yeah, but Bill bars, he's baldness to ball to be called Rabbi like it's hard to calm redhead. Now who would like carrots. Are you? Okay carrot-top? Yeah. That's a that's the most famous like clearly mean. It's in his name Carrot Top. Yeah, right. Could you be is there any shame in that? No, no. No. I nobody ever owned redheads. Now, he's right did because there were a lot of Irish slaves, right? Yeah. I can straight the whole thing was Irish. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah with the original Red Hats really? Well, it's probably from the Scandinavians the Vikings had a lot of redheads like Erik the Red. Oh, right. That's the only reason I think Michaels head redheads. The guy's name is Erik the Red hmm, probably the red beard and blond hair probably covered in blood to right.


Oh my God those motherfuckers ever go to your see those people in Iceland that Windows strongman competitions. Yes. They're the remnants of the Vikings. They are a snort. Human beings that live in the Frozen North where the Vikings lived the okeanos the word Berserk comes from them because Yorkers yeah these to come down and go berserk. You know what these to do these take mushrooms. They dated. Yeah. That was a big thing. They would take mushrooms and Slaughter. Oh, wait a minute where they get mushrooms up there. I took mushrooms of in South America. No mushrooms are from all throughout Europe mushrooms are all throughout North America. They're native to a lot of different climates. Well, they would preserve them to that would get them in the summertime and then they preserve them in the wintertime.


But I'm 99% sure that was a part of the history of the Vikings is that they would they would take a lot of mushrooms. Well, when when I was growing up, I mean I consider myself the early there we go. Fly all Garrick mushroom. Yeah, that's the Amanita. Muscaria the first account of Vikings going berserk because they ate magic mushrooms was hypothesized in 1784 by a Christian priest named bodman. He came to a conclusion. Illusion that connected the Berserkers to the fly. I'll Garrick mushroom because he read that Siberian shamans did the same thing when they were healing hmm that mutt that show Vikings. Yeah. See that show no fun, Joe they take mushrooms in that show, but the Vikings eat mushrooms.


Let's see that see that that's they connected to the Amanita. Muscaria red and white mushroom. So that's not the same Mushroom in the Viking movie or the Viking television show. It looks like they're taking psilocybin Some Scholars proposed that certain examples of the Berserker rage had been induced voluntarily by the consumption of drugs such as the hallucinogenic mushroom, Amanita. Muscaria or massive amounts of alcohol. But here's my problem is that when I was growing up we had a lot of masculine which was basically mushrooms in organic. You know, it's or chemical. What's that sort of masculine is a great Marshal. Yeah, but masculine is that I think it's more it's in the stimulant category.


I think he's even more so there's going to prove Point when you're eating masculine acid any of this stuff mushrooms, you don't tend to want to get violent. That's true. But if you live in a completely violent world, right and you took mushrooms, I don't think it would turn you peaceful. No an attorney peaceful, but you might be like, I'm just going to stay in the Forge, you know, these guys are going on this stupid trip going to go on an 18-hour trip to going Rampage through some civilization. You're not here's why I disagree. It's become a thing with fighters to take mushrooms and fight. What? Yeah, yeah, it's actually really common and the thing is did not really testing for it. So there's certain Fighters that are taking mushrooms and then competing in kickboxing competing in MMA on mushrooms.


I'm on mushrooms. That's the hilarious. That's one of the greatest things I've ever heard. Well, they say it makes them way more effective and then they almost can like read things better. They're locked in better. I can see locking but you also get trails and stuff like that. This goes on, you know, maybe it's Much it take like maybe just take a dose. That's also you got to realize these people are like their adrenaline through the roof like the effects of the mushrooms probably very different. If you're about to go into a fight. My adrenaline was through the roof when I was 17 now, listen doc Ellis, of course took the acid that we have famous one. Yeah, but that's not why I came. Oh, yeah. It's pitched a no-hitter. He pitched in a way.


Yeah, there's no hitter on acid. But this real There's real evidence that though in some Some circumstances psychedelics can enhance your performance? Well, I'll tell you I'll tell you a story when I will tell you. They probably the third time I took acid maybe I was 16 and this is a fight it's got violence in it, but it's not that I was so I was chick. I was at a sweet 16 in Brooklyn. Yeah, there's a mob was a mob one place by the way, so you do sweet 16. This is a lot to do with my whole life when I really look back on it. So 16 I was in love with this girl. She wasn't dating me, but she was at the party but It is set up. So it's like he's a sweet 16. He is an office party.


They're all in the same room and then there's a stage down at the bottom and he has, you know, some guy that you know, just got his you retired from the job whatever his job. Then you have you know, what seems like 15 different events of two tables each at this place Palm Shores clubs called in Brooklyn. So I'm at the party with my friends and this is girl I'm in love with but I haven't dated. Yeah we ended up. Going out for a couple years as his butt. So shoot. I'm tripping on acid and then the one of the other groups that was with our group because the girl I've been switching steam had our other friends head to one of these guys sold part to the girl I loved Shoulder bag of weed.


So she's like a now Brooklyn. She's like a look at me. Beat me on the sweetie. So me like four joints. So me shit knight in shining armor and I go off to I don't know you these long tables to relocate excuse me tap them on the shoulder, you know, excuse me. She feels like you shorted. I'm not dating. I'm just, you know, I'm in love with her. She shortage on you showed her the sweet. So, you know, he might want to give her a couple more two nights. Because I know I didn't turns away. Listen, excuse me, you know, he's uh, she feels you did you give him four joints whatever knows days you get like six joints for a bigger Plateau Bakery, maybe seven years ago.


Yeah. I kind of shorter. I'm still not sure to this day if he showed it, by the way, I didn't count them. You know, you just being a white knight. I've just been a white knight. So he goes now I didn't get the fuck out, you know, just basically like, you know, he has to show his pride to his letting this guy tapped on the shoulder a couple of times. He's with his friends. I'm with my little friends and I go and he goes get back. Like, you know, just you know now I'm starting to annoy me know and he's like was this bad you had to do that. So I was like, haha baah jump on him started punching him in the middle of joint event jumping punch them every day. You know, what our work is her UPS, you know, it's like a a whole place or tables going crazy screams, you know fights and the grandmother my friend wrote a song about it by the way the next day and Because the grandmother kicked me in the ear my whole life.


My whole here was caked with blood because I'm ruining a granddaughter and her mother can't do it the grandmother Collier scramble on the climb on the ground. He was capable of because I'm ruining a granddaughter 16. I don't believe me go and they breaking up but meanwhile, oh, so anyway, long story short. I'm so I'm tripping so I was like, this is like the third time I've tried maybe maybe the second I was on acid. I'd done masculine everything else. So I'm tripping so finally they dragged me out. I'm Like bodily put some Mafia Place remember downstairs in the basement these two guys couple of Young The Young mob guys, you know, I could tell it was like young thing, you know guys who didn't look like to me like my angel stop punching me and then they just look at me I could tell you just like look at this guy is so pathetically pussy-whipped.


They just tell them my eyes. I was just like get him out of here and just toss me on to Evans Avenue shopping street in Sheepshead Bay and then my friends Drove by like I'm walking, you know stumbling along like three minutes later my friends drove by because they left till they had to leave and they just could not stop laughing. I'm just standing but here's the weird part of the story is that on stage was his old man who at that moment was doing stand-up comedy and to this day any time I ever like hecklers. I'm like, that's Karma because I was the guy that ruined he said he's going come on fellas calm down. I heard him say that and at the time I noticed because I was like, why is there an Special old doing stand-up but he's probably a guy, you know doing it at that time.


And she said Ben was some Knockaround join getting paid getting paid and then an idiot wounds his whole show with a brawl over a five dollar bag of weed over a bag of wheat, which may or may not have been to it. And when you think about that like have you ever done gigs like that? Did you ever have to do like a like a kids party or anything like that? Oh my God. Yeah. I mean almost did you mean gigs? Where you Jeff where? You just don't I mean sure I'm even having a bachelor parties. I did a couple of those but Bachelor parties they suck. Yeah, but at least it's not like you ever do a gig where you don't when you're first starting out. Will you not you don't have enough clean material and you walk in the ego?


I can't I have to cut Every curse out and you have nothing left you realize I have nothing to say that these people. Oh, yeah, because my ACT is fight night clubs and this is not a nightclub. It's a daytime Club. Yeah. I've done a couple of those like Small events where just you feel like it exposes every floor in your comedy hit it does so to small shows small should that's the beauty of small shows. There are like a cleansing agent. Yes all the fat in your act all the fat all the cheat all the momentum that yeah, he's done them all the horrible curses. Yes, just all right there and these people are looking there and they dress nice and I did a car show when I think two years and it was like an afternoon show like 200 bucks.


She knows days like 100 200 bucks and afternoon show I went there and it was just maybe 50 and I was too new to know that I was walking. I didn't even realize now if you walked into you like, okay, this is a nightmare. Here's what I got to do it. That was like a really smart thing that Chris Rock used to do a lot is he would show up at the store unannounced late? So he would go there where there was the audience's down to like 15 20 people and then he would go up with his shit that he was working on and he would find out what's good and Bad because when there's 15 people and they're spread out, there's like three here to and front of yes I've over there. Yes, you really know what the fuck is good. And what's not if you're there in front of 300 people like oh my God, it's Chris Rock everything.


He says the man. Yeah you with your date. Like wow, we got lucky tonight. Chris Rock's here. Yeah, but if you're there this fucking 15 people, it's 1:00 in the morning. Like then you find out how much of your materials nonsense. Oh my God. Yeah. No, of course. That's that's where you really Expose and it's the best any of you best sets. Yeah. But but the negative side of it is then you listen to the taping like a lot of that was free association. You can save your hair wasn't that great. Well, that's the thing about comedy. Like I feel like comedy to really develop a good set. It's almost like it's like cross-training like you needed to lift a little weights. But you also need to do some jogging like you need to do a bunch of different things and you need to have a big crowd.


So you see if this is a set that you can that's really worth filming and then sometimes have to have a Crowd with an unimpressed by you. They're not there to see you. Absolutely and you see if they can if you can if this stuff it really can resonate with people that don't even know you absolutely absolutely. I mean, that's the beauty the reason we're all still so obsessed with comedy is because of these little that it can still surprise you every time and still challenge you every time yeah, there's a million things. We like I can't believe I know so much and I know so little after all these years of doing it, you know, well, the the beautiful thing too is every time you do a specially become a beginner. Again, as even though you know how to craft the material the material you have is dog shit and that you it's like it's on Bambi legs and you gotta you gotta figure out a way to get it moving again.


And that's why but my new Theory which you're going to like this for the for the Austin comedy club. Is that down south now because nobody can work out up north once it gets to be winter. So it's going to be like baseball how old the Dominicans because well the south is where all the great king warm here year-round because the covid is going to It New York City and shut everything down again. Yeah, once flu season kicks in. Yeah, it's already shut its never opened comedy comes have an open but they're open outside right a few of them outside. Yeah, but you know, how are they doing that they on the street? Like what are they doing there on the officer some on the street While most of the cops they've won comedy comes on the street but most of them are in like Parks or in like parking lots is a lot of part of weird.


Yeah. So how do you get people to pay to sit in a park? Yeah. I don't know. I mean because otherwise it mean people can just walk up. I mean that's down the outside. And listen don't have to pay. Yeah the parking lot you always just the problem with doing a parking lot. As you know, you could be doing great. You know, there's some idiot outside the parking lot. That could start screaming. Yeah, like when I was 16, I would have done, you know, sure audio Warren. Yes. That's oh my God. We're just play Andrew Dice Clay really loud in your car. Just something to distract. Give them my good ideas. Yeah. I did a gazebo couple of weeks ago benefit up in Connecticut and like a wedding gazebo.


Yeah, like an outdoor York or in the Gazebo. Yeah, he's doing in Ohio. It's well, it's like a wedding chapel outside wedding chapel. That's where you going to shows. Yeah. The Town Square was just doing a benefit and a couple of kids grow by when the guy before me was on and just taunting great when you joke. Do you know Bert Kreischer? Sure your birds doing a lot of these Drive in chose. I know I know he is of course I go. So how was the show like it was great. It was 700 cars like 700 cars now. That's a lot of cars. Yeah, that's what I just stated for a film acts. I did like a comedy outdoor special with a bunch of comedians from New York and 30 cars and it was it went back far.


How did he get 7 he's doing giant place was 30 cars and it was way back. Yeah. This must be like, I mean, I can't imagine how far back it must go. It goes far and they all like their lights and honk their horns and shits, right? That's what they were doing. Yeah. Oh my God 700. Yeah. I'd like to now I'd like to see that. Yeah, but birds hammered to right so he's like barely aware of what's happening when the lights are flashing people are talking having a great time. Yeah, there you got video of it like this is by the way, this is I'm 99% Sure so I'm just going to say this I this is all his idea. Look how big this is this huge. Wow. Wow, there is in Lee and he did it all across the country to take the shirt off every show because it's important.


Oh my God. Yeah, and I'm now he has to yeah now he's like Island and wrapped. Right right. She has to dance every show he scrapped. So this is how he did it so he would go out and do these crazy shows where he's in the parking lot. They set up a stage with lights. Now. Look at that. He's been touring the bird that he's one of the only guys that through this pandemic has been regularly touring in a pretty safe wet looking on those fucking cars. Yeah, that's crazy. Pretty safe wet. That's kind of cool. It's actually really cool looking. He said he enjoyed it. He said it was great. He enjoyed it. But you know, but birds kind of gathered enjoy. Things like that.


Yeah. Yeah, you know, I mean like I could see myself getting aggravated by this and birds like with the greatest, you know, he'll be this is all real jump in their cars not making out with them. I don't mean like throat enjoy stuff. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. I just, you know, I miss real comedy like Marc Norman said it best. He's like, this is all methadone. He was we're all doing methadone because I want a real shot because I want the real hit right in the veins. He really want to take this methadone is the he's Park shows these outdoor shows and the virtual shows the worst like that. Oh my God. Yeah, that's crazy. I've watched Good Comics bomb on zoom and I'm like stop.


Yeah. Stop doing that. There's no one there. You can't do that. No, it sounds like it sounds like pigeons like you don't get laughter. You just hear this weird old. Laughs what's going on? It's just not a bad. It's a terrible way to do comedy now. Yeah, it's but that's again what I love about Is that it makes us really a like you realize a lot of people are going to fall by the wayside to yeah, because that one is going to go down that gun. Yeah. Thank the money's going to go down this Champion prepping people for low salaries at Austin comedy club. The money is going to go down you're going to design Austin comedy club for me. I would love it, but I'd like to really room.


I'd like to curate the audience how you gonna do that already? We had a conflict when I was telling you I don't want those drunks in the orange. Look at let him have a few drinks. I'm like no Joe you want to Test them all to make sure they're not drunk. Yeah, because I don't like you like well some drugs don't Heckle I know but then they sit there like this. You think they'll listen to G and they're all so good. What's a one-time was in Cleveland and was yelling the whole crowds were drunk and just horrible and it was this beautiful couple of front guy and girl blond dressed expensive like I mean, they just look like modeled movie stars and I was like these people people like this come to see a show bye-bye. Just yell at the crabs were like teca's late show, you know, and then finish them. Five minutes later the couple get up to go to the bathroom or lever and they both face planted.


They were so happy. They leave North talking didn't know where they were. We finally have a rapid test. So here like we got tested we got the same test that the White House uses. So have a machine doing those swab and get a result in 15 minutes. So you could conceivably have a show where people would show up say 40 minutes early. Everybody gets in line gets tested when you get cleaned and get inside and have a A drink so you could do a comedy club and have everybody with no mask on you got you could conceive yes these people likely even if people get tested wear a mask like everyone's so Mass Consciousness now, like when we do the UFC, I can't do in-person interviews with the fighters, right, but I'm tested and they're tested everybody's tested but have to be tested even be in the building have to be clean the day of to be in the building.


But yet still they want everybody to wear a mask like that doesn't make any fucking sense. Nobody. It's also because we live in a country that's built on lawsuits. Everybody's like whoa, that sounds like a look. There's 80 people go and don't wear a mask. I want to see what happens just so they can try to sue you. That's well. You have to sign a waiver. Well, if you gonna get to Austin comedy club you'd have to sign a waiver Lawson Comedy Club. I hate to say this. It sounds like I'm already abusing the system, but I think the MC should have to do the testing they should have to be registered. Where does it hurt? You have to be a nurse to be a host? To be a nurse gotta get there early. Do you know Souls a few bucks? Yeah, you know like host would have to like pitch chicken wings and someplace try the wings in this place.


Well why I used to bartend when I started comment with bought ended the comic strip, but he wouldn't they wouldn't let me on because they were like no it's a conflict of interest. It was a big ethical problem really is you gotta quit your job as a bartender to be I quit before I could audition. Yeah, that's ridiculous. But the stores the opposite the store all the people that work. There are Comics everyone the dormant always been but the They actually like Ari when I met him he was a doorman he was yeah became and then there was a beautiful thing as you eventually filmed his first special at the store is Comedy Central special. So it was like, wow, what a full circle he made. Yeah. He he he seems more like a comedian than a doorman. If I may say you are man.


Here's a total give a fuck where he should sit wherever this place is. Gritty. This place is crazy. Yeah, but everybody Tony Hinchcliffe everybody that works. There they they will everybody that works there as a dormant is a comic everybody that works to cover Booth is a comic a lot of the people that work behind the bar Comics. Well, you guys is crew really trying to place her man because I was there in the early 90s and Comedy Store. I was there working. Okay. I didn't work that much money is in that way, but it was a shit hole. Well, not only was it should go Monday was considered gang night and it wasn't like it was an inside joke like everybody knew. Gang night The Gangs note was getting laid so they would have gangs it was just this crazy atmosphere like this tense atmosphere.


Every Monday night was getting yeah. It was not good when I got there in 94, I got there 94. Yeah pretty rough. But occasionally it was good like occasion like Damon Wayans was stopped by writer Martin Lawrence would stop by like someone good would be there and you'd go. Wow. Okay now I get to see a real comic but a lot of it was like half empty not even basil tough. He has a lot of bodachs. Yeah. Oh, yeah, that's right. Now a lot of guys are really just shouldn't have been there and my theory was that like kinnison had left there somewhere around 86 right? And when I got there 94 eight years later, it was just still like because before that it was booming right there was Kennison Letterman and all these guys were there and then when he left and he was banned from the store.


I think he took everybody with them and I think when I got there in 94, it was like he was already dead and it was like The Echoes of that. That his generation it already kind of died off. Yeah. Well, I was when I was in LA I was in LA and 89, I guess of 90 or something 88-89 and The Improv was the respectable Club. It was what the store became and the store was already crazy, you know that. Yeah, and it was like that 94. Yeah, the agents wouldn't go there because they couldn't get in for free. Right? Right, right. That's because Mitch who's Lana came out flat where you work? Yeah, like if you if you were an agent you wanted to Tables like p?t?. Tell him to pass with no I don't believe because the whole time was an agent you would have made a dime.


Yeah. Yeah, and not only that they didn't pay attention. She would say they would talk back they did. I remember I went to see a show case. Once they for whatever reason William Morris had a showcase at a nightclub and there was a downstairs where they had people seated in the upstairs was like this little balcony. Where is a bar and it was filled with agents and they were talking full blast while the show was going up and I said, I'm not going Going up. I tell my age on my I'm not going up. There's no fucking way and Apollo was on stage and the Paul's on stage and he's yelling at these fucking people that are up in the balcony. Like he's talking shit about the rules. It was terrible. Yeah, it was like the worst atmosphere for comedy and the Agents didn't give a fuck agents assistants.


A lot of them. They were drinking and talking. Yeah. They're just laughter. Yeah, you're having a social time. They're having free drinks, you know, it's like this is their opportunity to chitchat. So while the show was going on, I mean full-blown bar level. Talking. Yeah. Yeah, it's terrible. Yeah, it was with Mitzi tried to avoid. She's like Gana Mana here know she had the right to shit. Definitely the right spirit. So I do not even know Kenneth. She was I remember Kennison was there one night Rich. Jenny told me well, you know rest him in peace to love that guy. Yeah, great guy God he was good. But he knew he knew Kennison and it Kennison told him a hundred dollars. So he went by The Comedy Store to get paid. He was in town is that you know, the guys doing great now he's making a lot of money and it's like 1988-89 and because I'm good.


Get paid from I'm gonna go borrow them and he goes to the MC when Kennedy gets off. I'm getting a hundred bucks. He owes me a hundred bucks. He never paid me. He's Rich. I'm just, you know working the road and then just and Sam. Do you start screaming? Somebody want socket? You have been he's new. He goes, I'm gonna take this napkin. I want you to write down the names of all your all your loved ones your dead grandmother that will always treat you to go through the whole city somebody the audience to go right down your dead grandmother was always there for you write down your uncle that pager way through you know, And I want you to write them all down and then I would just hand it back to me because I'm going to wipe my ass, right and he said that he said the guy just exploded attacked him. Sam's body guards.


Just don't punch it, you know turning through like a brawl at The Comedy Store. Yeah. I was so mad, you know, and then the MC goes to which any maybe she's asking for 50 Yeah, he was I missed all that I missed the kiss and I saw him live a few times when I was an open mic her when I was in Boston. I went to see him three times. Well while he was alive one time was it great woods and one time was down the cape and then there was one of the time and it was just it was just it was interesting to see because it was like he didn't have new material and he was trying to do some of the bits from the old stuff and people would call out the punch lines.


It has any had he had a kind of right new shit while he was touring, you know, and the HBO special just come out because it was kind of a new thing fact that like there weren't a lot of HBO specials. It wasn't. Well no, no real common thing. No, and he developed that act over years and years and years. Yes, and then all of a sudden he's this hugely famous comedian. They come to see him. He doesn't really have a lot of new materials. Yeah. No that definitely happened a lot of guys back then where they just be like, they weren't used to people knowing their Yeah. Yeah everybody I don't hear that's the thing about comedy musicians people are calling out for their best hits. Yeah, if you do something new they get mad. Yeah comedians just the opposite. I know it's crazy.


It's such a hassle but you know, it's the way it is and especially Sam Zach because it was all built up. Yeah and a big punch line. So there was no in-between. Yeah. Yeah, so I got to see like his be level material. I never got to see the a material live. I got to see it on TV, but when I saw him live it was all kind of like Half asked stuff. Yeah, it wasn't wasn't really that good. But it was also because he's crowd was so annoyingly like screaming at him that he ended up having a like you almost couldn't develop. Yeah, because like you said it could have been what Chris did go in when there's 15 people. Yep. You should have done that. Well, he was just touring right he wasn't yeah, like he developed his comedy by going up late at the store.


Right? That was right thing like going up late he put that act together over here. Years of struggle and then all of a sudden he was huge and now he's got to do these thousands of seats and it's not the same you can't develop an act. It's just you can but it's a goddamn it's hard to develop an active front of thousands and thousands of people and how about I know? Yeah, I don't know. I don't know how you could do. I mean how about the fact that him in Prior both from Peoria crazy is that wild weird, but he started used it. They said Sam and used to beat him and Bill Hicks all there to that and they said to him one time. Be like tied himself to the thing out. So yeah the annex because they censored him the would let him go up.


Yeah, they those guys they had developed a real scene down here in Texas. They really did Hicks had a real scene in Austin Hicks started out here and then eventually Went to went to Houston. Yeah, maybe started in Houston and went to here eventually. That's right. I think he started in Houston did Houston and Austin and then he wanted when he came to die died out here. Here. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. I just called the Houston Comets that hate God. What was I because Texas is often thought of as being very that's why they're so obsessed with this, you know, but a lot of like I think Garofalo came out here. I think she came ashore in that time to train they had a bunch of but he could because it was like a scene like I remember hearing that she was coming out here because I knew her from Boston.


I was like, wow, that's kind of why I like Texas. Is that correct? Like it made me rethink what Texas is in my head? Yeah. I'm Brett Butler here. This was during the 80s and this is during the kinnison era and I was trying to had Ron shock you remember him? Yeah. Do you remember Andy Hinton? Jimmy pineapple? Yeah. I work with Jimmy Pina as one of the first times ever did the Houston laughs stop. I work with Jimmy pineapple this crazy. Yeah those guys, you know, the laws of comedy and he hid yourself a joke which you know, he's goes so these girls haven't sex younger and younger these days. I overheard my sister's friends talking about there. They're 14 and they're having she's having sex. I pulled her aside.


I said, first of all what we did was wrong. Second of all telling people about his neck make it better. Fuck today get cancelled. Oh my God. Yeah, he'd being really is your empty. Be real trouble for all female Comics is start Twitter threads about you expose him. But Andy hadn't him and Ron shock wants to audacity Shan Shannon, you know him he's there too. And he told me the story about Ron shock and and he hadn't written one time. And you know, Ron Schott was right. You just was like kind of break it up and he goes there's and then Andy and goes wrong. To make it when they first started goes I know.


And he goes he was waiting from to say it back to him, you know because to comedian to new so you say back to each other. Yeah sure and he goes and it finally anything couldn't take you with us. I'm gonna make it to Aunt egos sure. You are Andy sure. They had a great open mic night back at that last stop. That was one thing about the lat. Did you work that place in Houston? Yeah, the last stop. Yeah. It was a great Club, but they had the bar area was an open mic night. Then they had the main showroom area and I remember I came in to do the show there. I did two shows and from the moment. I got on stage. They had the open mic going and then when I was by the time I was off stage the open mic was still going so the open mic would go to like 2 o'clock in the morning.


They had guys still going up like it was a real comedy community there. They react with their crap didn't power it any hacks? No, no bullshit. There was a serious thing. It was a great place was a great great seeing you and crazy Mark Babbitt Ram it Hijack, crazy fun - yeah. Yeah, he was a he was a nut but he really loved comedy. Love comedy. And yeah God have a nut he's like like people think well, you know that guy what wasn't the best businessman like you're not going to get the best businessman to run a goddamn Comedy Club. You going to get nutty people? Yeah. Yeah. I know exactly the same. It's he sure was a different kind of nutty people person Mark Babbitt was a different kind of nutty purse. But all the great club Owners were all crazy.


Well, the reason Boston was a good scene to was Team when I saw this, you know, I came in like 85. Let's say the Boston right first time ever was because Mike Lenny clock and clock my clock the money. They paid in Boston was like three or four times more than any other place three or four times like a gig in New York by 80 to be the middle in Boston. We pay to 90 or something because Lenny and more Mike was not ripping people off like yeah my sister great. I'm still making prints them to this day. Texting with him yesterday, but perfect love that guy and he whatever his thing was he was just this guy. That was like, yeah, you should get paid and it was like this Valhalla, you know this up and what was regulated it was also the big for you know, I mean, it was like the Mount Rushmore of Boston Sweeney Gavin, Brian and Roger said, yeah and and they would just you know, they just set a tone everyday.


Oh, you know you just and they were big guys to there were big guys Lenny Clarke sup fucking gorilla of a man with these big dude. Yeah, it was it was an interesting place because they were men like we thought of Comedy as being like these do we be like interest but those guys were doing coke and punching people there were wild fucks all those guys were hammered all the time. They're all a bunch of wild people. Oh my God, they wouldn't say they brought me up to be Sweeney when afternoon it Nixon. He was just in the back like this. You know that you want to be Sweeney was an empty was just him in the dark and she's looking like this, you know audience with the Pope. You there during the coke days where they yeah, try to pay in Coke.


Yes. Well, not me. I was already clean. But yeah, they tried it. They paid people in Coke all the time. It was quite it was psychotic out there. What's the only way you get great comedy? I think it's like it doesn't last because it's not sustainable that kind of a business model and then the comics never pay their taxes. They all wind up getting audited and you stopped writing because you a coked-up. Yeah. Just waiting for the coke deal. Yeah, when they had they the guy on the side, I mean, they're dealing Coke and uniformed it was not yeah. Well, I was a famously I'm sure that's why when I went up there and they pulled the old thing with Sweeney and chance went on before. Me and just destroy me destroyed on a Friday second show and then I end up literally because I remember I'm from New York.


So I don't understand is 1985 or 86. So I don't understand the culture. So I see a bunch of guys in polo shirts with with blond hair deck shoes white pants. I'm like, oh these must be some spoiled Kennedy guys. Like they look like yep. He's like they look like they're it's bank robbers from Chelsea. Yes. Yes, but I'm looking at this audience full of his guys in pink eyes a church or but you know and that's exact and then these badasses they're Savages. Yes. So I'm like psycho Carson and because I'm bombing so, you know we get into it. They're like backyard like you fuck you and just like, oh God fuck up.


I'm sorry. I'm just giving the thing. I see fucking asshole getting go back to you know, hyannisport and go play Touch football. You little pussy. And these guys I start to notice then finally I start to notice wait a minute. Some of these guys have tattoos back in the days when you know, I like because I like share my tattoos. I may be misreading the because I didn't know anything about most as far as the neighborhood's I don't know what's going on there. I just want pink eyes on shirts and you know Dutch facial scars. Yeah see nothing crooked noses. These guys are pretty musculature and long story short. It got so ugly that Joe leonetti had to come on stage from the back of the Room they took a joke or up there save it because they getting ready to rush the stage and beat the shit outta me the whole crowd.


They all must have felt like Joey goes on stage and he goes folks. I'm from east e this is my friend. We're going off stage. Now you leave us alone. We're going and you literally just went and I'm from east sea, he's from one of the neighborhood. So, you know, I'm a legitimate person and then we just had to hide in the kitchen until the whole crowd emptied out. Well if you were in New York, I you already had three strikes against you go on Father's Day. I knew none of that. But yeah date set you up to they would say I said that a Billy Crystal. Well, I walked in after the fact I didn't actually see it. But I walked in after the fact they were all bragging about it. They set up Billy Crystal with like Sweeney knocks Gavin boom.


Boom. Boom. They just had a murderous assault of local humor. Yeah. You couldn't follow you couldn't find they're talking about fucking Cape Cod going down the cape. Yes. Haven't gone it talking the Boston. And everybody's dying and then you would go up and like I'm Billy Crystal. Hey, how's everybody like the Emmys and they like get the fuck out of here. It was they did it to everybody. Well, guess what? It's funny you say that because the local references the last thing I remembered before I went on stage. I mean they're ripping is chance sweetie, sweetie kind of mopping his head like dreadlocks chances playing guitar and they're singing the song called come back to Jamaica Plain.


That's where I lived. I lived in Jamaica Plain. Yeah, it was all local stuff. That was a real problem. When I started doing the road. I had so much local material because they loved local material. It was like a cheat code like you can ask you can get a laugh you didn't deserve with local material. Well the same in New York you do that Subway stuff. You're in the North Carolina, which is people be like, what is the somebody talking about the subway as we know what it is, but but it's funny. You said the AFT I was there for the aftermath because I pictured the room when an aftermath when you know, sometimes you go into one of those In New York to open in Boston next and there was just broken shot glasses thrown around the room just chairs turned over like walk what happened here, but it was just a crazy business model.


They would set up these Headliners for failure on purpose all the time. Yeah all the time. And if you didn't know like if you were a guy from New York that was doing The Tonight Show and you're starting to do movies and you thought you were the shit. Yeah, and they would let you go on stage and they would like oh, yeah. Going to have this guy headline. He's Tonight Show and they would set you up with for murderers. Yeah would go on in front of you. I don't blame them. That's how you when you make an ambush money locally, you know, what a bunch of people come to horning in on you making it your didn't but by the way, I wasn't a headliner. I was just up there visit. I was staying at own even Denis Leary's house. I wasn't a headline, but they just did it for whatever for sport but he'll take two other place would do that.


If you went to Houston, they would give you a local act to be an opener will be normal. I mean they have good Comics, but they wouldn't Headline after headline after headline trying to blow you off the stage, right? They did it on purpose. Yeah, they did. Oh, yeah. I know they wanted you to eat shit these guys. We had our best 20 minutes just fuck about that that that that that back and you would go on stage an hour and 15 an hour and 20 minutes into a show where the audience was beaten into a pulse. And then these guys would buy it happened to me. That's exactly what happened and I was in the headliner and here's what happened. By the way. I just remembered it. I was the middle but Chance goes I'd like to get home early calling would you mind? If I went ahead of you, oh and I was like, yeah, okay dirty trick because I first showed been fine.


Yeah. It was like yeah fine. Go ahead dirt. I didn't know him. I know anybody was really fun dirty trick. They do that on purpose of course what it was but you know, do you really blame? Look here's the way it is. You're in the city you making great money, you know you doing getting paid in Coke everything set up correctly. Plus you're Irish. So you like who these assholes think they're going to come in here and big shot that way around it. The perfect Irish arrest to just go we're going to show you what a fucking big shot. You are the pleasure they got in their souls out of watching that week after week. Of course. They did the constantly the only person I saw survive that that Gauntlet was Da my rera da my railroad was he murdered he went up there and he was famous enough at the time that the the lot of the audience was there to see him.


Yep, and he was working so much. He was cool as a cucumber he would go on and his material was so goddamn so fun. So solid. Yep, he went up there and he killed. I remember the end of it. He goes, he goes ladies and gentlemen. I've been down my rare. I've been great you guys were okay he want a bad audience. He just had this casual confidence and just you have he survived the gauntlet tried. I tried to take him out. I could see it one of one of the other set people up. I saw some crazy show. I saw Bill Hicks get set up there. Wow, Billy's get set up there cleared the fucking room and never stopped never stop swinging. It was me. And Greg Fitzsimmons. We were open my curse at the time and we were sitting in the back of the room at Nick's comedy stop and and Hicks started out with 300 people and he was down to maybe 40 maybe 35 40 people at the end and everybody just gotten up and left and it was a row of comics the back laughing are fucking ass off it just like he was looking up he had some bit about someone taking a shit, right?


So he's like grunting over a toilet bowl and he looks up and goes this huge. Really clears the room and people just getting up and and just the crazy thing about it was the calmness of his bombing was a stunning always. He's like, she's so relaxed while bombing. Yeah. No, I never said anybody who literally would just be like he had such a zen-like attitude about cock because he didn't know since he was like 15 or whatever. Yeah, yeah and t-shirts because they all knew him when he first began and they said, Whole lacked was joke jokes hilarious joke jokes, like he had all his material but was all like one-liners right when he's 16 and 15.


Yeah. There's a video of him when he was really young. Yeah, he was real smooth and the video is him before he's 18 and he's fucking smooth and then he was like, hey, guess what? I want to do this different way. And I mean, he's just search her, you know, and also when I caught him when I saw him, I saw him live a few times he already quit doing drugs. Yeah. She was already clean and he just has really strange. Introspective thought-provoking act right and people didn't know what to make of he really changed comedy in a lot of ways because a lot of people imitated him because they would see him and they would go, you know comedy can kind of be profound doesn't just have to be funny like this guy made me feel like what I was talking about with stupid that I was done, right, you know, and then so lot like I remember in the back Green Room in the Atlanta punch line, right?


There was a The Green Room had a graffiti on the wall and one of the things that said quit trying to be Hicks because there's so many guys that were trying to be Hicks. Yes. So common. Yeah people would like tell the audience how dumb they were and how dumb America was and I know point they were trying to be profound without doing all the work first. That's right. That's right. Yeah. I mean how many people masquerade as as, you know, freaking out the crowd with their Brilliance was just that you know. That funny. Yeah, you just mean, you know, first be funny like Doctor's first Do no harm first be funny. And if you could be profound, that's great. That's another level but don't be up there going.


Hey, you guys don't get it. I'm bugging. I'm I'm ruining your middle class. Bushwa mentality said no, you're not stupid when Lenny Bruce did it? Yes that was shocking and it was groundbreaking don't be acting like, you know, I mean big so Lenny Bruce I would have run out. He Hicks with a podcast goddamn. He would have had a great podcast. Yeah. He would've had a really interesting podcast. Yeah, you're right and he had some there's some real interesting interviews with him where you know, he would do an interview and he wouldn't really try to be funny like that was the thing in these interviews guys are to be like half doing their act and sure he did a little bit of that. But for the most part he would actually talk about shit now. Yeah, I'm going to do that for the second half of this point to my Exile. I got some about that. That's why I was getting to try to work you into that, but you have to be funny.


No, what are you doing? They used to do a radio. Only in the 80s at least your I thought they'd go listen. Tell us what you set you up for. Oh, yeah. I'm to the 80s. I had someone try to do that to me and like 2014. I did the bomb and Tom Show back then they like I was like what? Yeah argue about setting up. What do you want to tortoise 2005 but it was it was mm. Yeah for sure the 80s that was the normal thing. If you said no, they'd be like, oh my God. This guy's gonna be terrible if Bob and Tom's defense they didn't care but the producer was adamant that I need to have specific things to talk. Talk about going to write I was like, what's I don't I'm not just going to go that go have fun. These guys are fun. I'm fun. Just relax.


Yeah, exactly. So you flew out here. How was your flight? Well was pretty good. But there was a guy next to me. Yeah, the morning radio thing. There was a lot of guys would do their act on morning Randy sure because nobody was recording it because it was like, yeah, you know, there was no internet back then and comedy was so new people driving go. Hey, this guy's pretty funny. Let's Get out there. I mean it was there it was there for a reason, you know, hey guys would do routines. Nice morning. Yeah, and it worked. Yeah that got people to come out to the club and then they would hear the same jokes. Ya at the club. Yeah. That was the other thing too is a nobody wrote in material back that nobody. I know so many guys that were so funny and they'd write maybe 40 And that was it and it will never have funny as anybody.


Yeah forever forever. And then you fade away but I mean, yeah, it ain't fun and was wasn't that the material was dated. It was just once you stop writing that stuff something about you becomes David's. Yeah. Well, they're act would get so polished. It would be like a samurai sword. They would hammer it down to just a perfect sharpness and they would like Don Gavin is fucking timing was so precise, but bing bong The bank and you'd be crying he was so confident and loose. Yeah, but they never left. They never left Boston. They stay they had that 40 minutes and they were they were as good as any comic that has ever has anybody ever.


Yeah and people didn't know but in New York too. Yeah bunch of guys in New York that were just great in the mid-80s when I started like Hood these guys were so funny. I was I was I was afraid you were gonna say that Well, like a guy like John Heyman hilarious. He became a writer but I'm saying he would get up and just so funny and he just he was the guy that would just sit at the bar only the community's clever witty guy. You know, I mean, he could have been one of the greats and everybody knew your kind of different thing in that the clubs were smaller because space is more limited. So yeah, he's we're on top of you see a lot of guys working the crowd because they were so close to you.


You almost felt like you had to yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, yeah, most of the clubs in New York what it was a lot of it was a lot of crowd work. Yeah, which was good and bad. It was good in the sense that you know, it's funny to watch somebody be you know, I mean, it keeps it but it's bad in the sense that you a lot of people just became great at crowd work. I mean how many guys have just great a crowd will probably be fun? It's funny but you got to discipline yourself. If you're not writing is when you're going to do a show and the stage is up there and you're talking to an imaginary people which a lot of people do. Yeah, you're like, hey that guy and then after the show when you start me like hey, that guy wasn't fat. Hey his worn-out.


Why is he saying she was dressed like a hooker. This is this week crowd work. Yeah. There was a lot of there's a lot of to do that. Well the crowd Work is like it's like local material. Its a cheat code right when people think that you're coming up with it on the spot. They think this guy's brilliant. Yeah. Well, the only the part I object to is when somebody does something every night spontaneous and then they pretend they stumbled into it and start laughing at themselves. Oh, that's a fake laugh yourself. Sometimes you'll will laugh ears. Yes. It happens. The audience knows when it's not real. Yeah. They know they know unless there were two. Guarded some people some people don't know but most people know.


Yeah, they might go let you get away with it. But when you're laughing at the saying the same joke for the 50,000 time. Yeah. No, it's great. It's I mean, it really is a great thing about modern comedies. Everybody knows you got to keep putting out new hours. That's the great thing about modern comedy. Yeah with specials. Yes. Well, you've done an interesting thing where you've done these theme show ya know what led You two want to start doing that which is just you wanted it you had ideas you want to do that way or one Mansion? Yeah, I did. I did. I remember seeing one man shows when I first started I saw Eric bogosian. Do you know him? Yes, I remember him. He did these one-man shows. I was like, oh my God.


This guy's the coolest guy funny doing these characters. So I wanted to do like that kind of stuff. So I did this stuff in the early 90s. Just want me to chose on my on my free time, you know, and and then I and I watch a lily. And did one will be Goldberg did a really good one back then and I'm watching these one person chosen. I was like I want to do that and nice did this one called Irish wake but growing up back there, but then I just went back to stand up because stand up is you know how it is. It's so it keeps you from being out of the loop mentally and see ya that you can't because it's just you guys talk to Jerry about it all the time and it's it's like going into the water and just getting hit by a wave because The theoretical stuff like even now here we are talking stand up this and that it's all Theory once you're on stage for the project.


Ah, you could you survive it and I mean, yeah, so it's like yeah, we do this all my strategies, but now you gotta fight when you watch a guy like Jerry who's been doing it forever who such a Polish Pro right having a tough spot. Yeah. It's weird. It's weird to see be like up. Yep. We're all still just Comics will still Comics it but that's the beauty of it is. Is that the crowd it's just like a wave they'll give you a couple minutes. Yeah, if you all look Conklin's here. Yeah, he's funny the give you a couple minutes after a while like yeah. Yeah, they like the three guys. I never heard of well making us laugh and up guy I know is not what I paid money to laugh.


Exactly and that's the beauty of it. Yeah, because whatever you want to say like, would you why would Billy whatever you want to say? That's great. Yeah, but you still have to make them laugh or it's not definite by definition is not comedy right? You may be a For you, maybe the most brilliant or Ted talk as they say today, but it's not common. That's the importance also of showcase clubs where there's a bunch of comics going up in the not just there to see you because the people are just there to see you. They'll laugh at things. They it's like they're just a giant fan of whoever it is, you know, Jim Gaffigan. Yeah, they go to see Jim Gaffigan. Jim Gap is very funny guy. Yeah, but they will laugh they will laugh at him. But Jim Gaffigan will go to these other clubs to work out too because you have to do that as well.


Well, you got to go to a place where they don't necessarily come to see you. They come to see a show and you're on the show, but you got to perform. Yeah. Yeah, no exactly just know their art form like that. No musicians don't have to do that. Now. There's no other art form where you need the audience to help you write it. Yeah, you literally need that. That's why this coronavirus is so brutal for Camilla because without the audience you're going to Ramble On and On You know, I mean, yes, you'll go to a Long setups right with little punch lines of your even know the audience be like no no get to the joke. Like in your boy forgot to end this thing. How can I do this for this many years?


I'm forget you need an ending. Did you did you see Cosby at all before he wound up going to jail. Did you ever see him live now? I never saw him live. I mean I saw him live once when I worked at Great why I was actually working as a security guard and he was there live but I didn't get to say I wasn't a comic back then I was 19. I didn't get to see the whole show. I really paid attention to it, but he never worked out he and he talked about he said I know what's funny. I know how to how to do funny. Like I don't need to work out my material so he would just kind of write and then he would go up and do these and from all accounts like Chris Rock said it and Burr said it they went to see him. He said it was fucking brilliant.


Brilliant. Yeah, and he didn't work out like I would like to see what that was. Like, I would like to see it too. Yeah, Jerry Seinfeld Chris Rock. They always said they went to see Bill Cosby loved it in any mean. Yeah. I mean, I wonder about that. It's a little hero worship to write like, you know, like how much of it is. You're supposed to love it. How much of it you love it because it's great. Yeah. I'm guess. I mean if they hear what worshipped him. Yeah before he got. Oh, yeah rested everybody hero-worshipped him. I didn't he didn't I'd have liked it. I didn't like his act that much. I mean I thought it was one time. I did a big benefit to Big Connie Hall shows have tonight right after 9/11 and Cosby was on and it was it was it was an interesting night for to his but one of them is we he asked to meet me after my set.


He was here worshiping me Joe in my opinion, but wow, he brought me up because he wanted to meet me because I said so I go up and I brought my girlfriend at the time very, you know, pretty and I walked in with her and she had a certain look that I could admit, you know, like very exotic looking to and you know dressed up and Cosby was there in sweatpants smoking a cigar and Carnegie Hall which you know only certain Get away with the cheese and some dressing my colleague over the cigar and he's talked to me for 20 minutes. He looked at me for about eight seconds of the 20. He was literally look be made it a joke, but it was dead serious, but he was looking at her while he was talking to me the whole time and we're all like laughing like he's in on the joke, but it was so like she thought it was so weird, but the same night Tom Papa was there with his wife Cynthia and Bill Clinton was there to it was like a big guy right?


It's a 911 And Clinton was shot. He walked around the room. He just he was so smart, you know everything they say about him but then he starts talking to Tom Papa. He starts flirting with Cynthia right in front of everybody and we're all laughing but he's like, hey, I love it was one of those nights fascinating in retrospect, right? It was a me to benefit in retrospect. I remember I called Bill Cosby a douchebag on your show when I was on tough crowd because he was ahead of the time he was being interviewed by Under Sykes, right and Wanda was interviewing him. He starts chastising her for the way. She's taught on the right and he had sunglasses on like, oh that guy's a fucking douchebag.


That's and that's great. And I remember thinking like cheese who the fuck am I to call Bill Cosby a douchebag mean this is like yes, I mean, when was tough crowd? What year my talking about? How kind of think that early 3 2004? Yeah. He's a fucking douchebag. That's hilarious. I remember that when he was like, yeah, you guys were my say yeah. She was just having fun Ash. Talking to him. She was just trying to be funny and he chastised her for the way. She was speaking. It was crazy. Like it was real weird. Like who the fuck are you to tell her how to talk especially on TV and especially why everybody loves Wanda? Yeah. Just walking on the crowd. Yeah, and she's just working. She's a common ass. It wasn't nothing.


She did was offensive and it's just her talking and I remember being on the show and then I remember leaving going Jesus really cool Bill Cosby a douchebag like Thomas probably shouldn't do that. I feel like a lot of people have to show saying something like that about the show that show would not be possible today. No, I mean it really was like a podcast and a lot of ways. Yeah, you know, yeah really was was it's a fucking great show though. Thanks. It was a great show. Thanks. It really was and you were the perfect host for to because you were loose enough and light enough with everything. You can kind of keep the glue together. Yeah. I mean I took as much abuse is anybody on? Oh, yeah, but it was it was a rare moment where like in perfect name to tough crowd is a perfect name for has there ever been a talk about bringing that back?


Oh God. Yeah, everybody talks about it, but I'm like where you know, I mean, what about as a podcast people say that I'm not I mean because first of all I resented at the time that I was like, yeah didn't want to you know, I mean like right who knows. I'm presenting I'm fighting against something. It does is not even part of the podcast world and but then I was just like, I don't know then I'm going to You know, I mean getting everybody together and you know people's careers would fall left and right if we did it. Oh, yeah, I mean anybody on there that would they be able to really even speak honestly today? Kinda you hired Nick you gotta have a career that's pretty locked in already or you got to be on the on the come up where you got nothing to lose.


It's the guys that are on a television show that are fucked. Yeah, like the guys who get a TV show or you're Really worried about losing it right those guys can't they can't do a show like that. But back then you could go back then we did but there it is Colin Quinn tough crowd. There. It is. Look at that. That is a Patrice cheese. Oh my God. He was a star that fucking show. Well Norton was great on that show. The Paulo is great on that. Everybody is great in that Giraldo this Geraldo Faldo and Owen Geraldo and Larry went out at that was one of the Great Moments of the show 10 years. She'll Gerardo's dead two days ago. I have been Larry that was oh that was a good one. And Lenny Clarke was here. It's just a great setup.


Like the way you had. It was just a great set up Patrice. Literally. It was basically his shell as you can see from that footage. I was a guest he was the host little chubby Jimmy. Look at Jimmy now the trouble is that fool is a great fucking show man. Yeah. How many episodes did you guys wind up doing 200? I think wow, I don't in 20th. I have none can we get you to do it as a podcast? I don't know because you can get guys like me guys like established Comics would do it and it would be wild you could still do it example be done as a podcast he can because like you have a guy like Joey Diaz on he doesn't give a fuck right and you can have those guys and they will talk freely.


Yeah, and people would love it. Oh my God, they would love it. Yeah, it might be I don't know. I mean over the years obviously people. To put up to and I was like now because he could never do you own the name be free to say no, but I got a better one the original name which already talked me off of which is the expression really more than tough. Crowd tough room. Ooh, and I think I do want a name. Yeah. Anywho either way tougher knows better tough room is a podcast tough room. Why not? I don't know maybe looks how many guys in New York would do it a lot. Yes easy. Yeah, Norton would do it for sure hundred percent.


Well, he wouldn't be invited on but you brought up the one day and someone that's not on the show. There's plenty Comics that we're doing. Alright Joey Diaz is in Jersey now. Oh, yeah a lot of peace out there in the east coast. Yeah. You got the fuck out. Most people are leaving La is just a sinking ship. Yeah, but he's leaving that's But it's also good things move on. Like I said comedy. I'm not even kidding. What if it becomes this, you know, he outdoor thing. Everyone's gonna move down south. It could be an outdoor thing, but I think more than anything. It could be a thing where you just I think they're going to have some sort of a treatment for covid sooner or later and it's just a matter of likes it.


Look the reason why La was La was because everybody came out there do TV and movies, right and then they want to be doing comedy as well. Well, and then they did comedy while they were doing TV and movies but it was always when I started in the 90s in La was a means to an end. Like when I came out there. I came out there to do a television show and there was a lot of people that were doing stand-up hoping they would get a TV show. That's how I came out there with a TV show right hoping to get past as a paid regular at the store. And then once I was there I was like this is weird because like I don't really want it I was doing TV for money and every time a new TV project came up was like, okay, but really I had this dream my dream was like, I would really love if I could just do Stand up. I'm doing all this stuff so I can make enough like Stanhope said it best he goes basically we're doing TV to make sure we have an audience so that we could do stand-up absolutely.


But now that doesn't exist anymore. Nobody gives a fuck about tv nobody cares for a lot of comics. If you get a TV show it's like poor guy. You gotta show. It's like now you're stuck. You're right. He's gonna get less money. You can't say what you want. You can't talk wild and you never know when your schedule you can't go on the road. Right? Right and you have to deal with all these weird. Politics of sets now. Yeah, like every set has to be diverse. You have to like the casting is weird. It's all fake. It's like you don't you're not casting the best people you have to make sure you have an Asian character this character and Weir's you're gay representation and it's just it's as if it's a if it's a urban gang they have to look like Greg Kinnear.


But it's just nowadays. You don't need that Hollywood environment anymore. It's actually an impediment because it comes to the executives and it comes with agents and it comes with all these all these people that can get their greasy hands on the formula and fuck it up. They're going to tell you what to do and what not to do. They're going to pull you aside. They're going to give you shitty advice that they're creative input is going to be sure dog shit. Well a place like this Colin Quinn. How do you in Texas? You don't have that? You know, I know I love it. You got to move here. I don't know. I don't know. I'm such I mean I do love it. I love the idea of moving here. And I love I love it. I'm trying to get everybody to move here.


If you have I know this is half the goal of having people on this podcast. Yeah. Well, I'd like to you know, if I move here I'm going to do it. I'll be one of the I want to be one of the early ones. I don't want to be one of the guys that comes in like, oh now he's jumping in the band. We're fifth year, right? Yeah now I don't want anyone. I'm out if I do it'll have to be The next year because I can't be one of these guys has you know coming in late. Well, you're gonna help me design the club right? Maybe I come down as a designer / manager of the club and well, maybe I secretly booked the club and people go who's the practice book in this club? Right? You never know like you leave your they both you don't have a purse. Yeah, you can't have a single person that people can call to get booked.


Well, I've always felt even as much as I love Comedians and I love comedian. So my favorite people I always feel sorry for Booker's because having to deal with us people don't understand the mental disorder, you have to have to be a successful Community, which is you have to think if I was up there right now no matter who's up there. I do good too. I'm as funny as anybody and if you don't think that you can't last it's this this sad thing is people that think that were no one else thinks that the own tommix. No, they're not good. Yeah, and they're like, I don't get the respect. I deserve like no, but you do here's the thing about comedy. Everybody gets the respect they deserve They all did anybody who says, you know, I didn't you know, they made they made it seem like I had to earn their respect you do.


Yeah, you do have to earn their respect and you get what you deserve in. This is a meritocracy. It's the closest thing to a meritocracy that can exist and I agree it is out of any job in the world that close to think of meritocracy whenever you see a comic saying I'm not getting the respect I deserve you like. Oh no, that's not true. Yeah, you do get what you deserve. You know, it's all there because when people are murderers everybody everybody. Boughs down everybody that guys fucking great or she's amazing, right? Everybody. Does it well, unless they will hacks is actually Botox have murder. Yeah, but attack that I'll never follow right that's it killers and I bow down to the fact that they can be that they can do that even though I hate them for it, but I'll say I give a little bit of credit.


I know he's saying I know he's saying like did I think they figured out a way to Juke the system. Yes, but in terms of like a great calm write a comic that the audience laughing we all respect whoever you were there. Hi girl. Gay straight absolutely white black. Yeah, no one gives a fuck. Are you a killer? Yeah. Are you a killer? That's right. Yeah, and if you're not a killer and you think you are it's a rough road. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I don't get the respect. I deserve from this club, but you do know. Yeah, but you do yes, if you were laying it down every night. They would all be like God damn he's killing it, but this would have same Booker's everybody thinks they should be at that place right there.


Yep everything. She should be on stage Old Times. Yeah, so to be a Booker you can't you're going to make a lot of enemies. Yeah. Yeah, and then this people that think that this should be like there should be a certain amount of women is right. There should be more women on this line up right now. This shouldn't if they're funny that shit. Oh, yeah, but I look I've always said and I still maintain this day. I think it's a difficult Road for a woman. I think there's women there's a lot of men that don't want to hear women talk about politics. There's a lot of men who don't want to hear women. Tell them things that maybe they don't know or say Comedy in a way like they're explaining things to the men. There's a lot of men are sexist. I think harder sure harder for them to talk about sex.


They like Christopher Hitchens had a whole article. He wrote in Vanity Fair about this back in the day was very controversial. It's called women aren't funny and all these women got really upset at him, but he was basically saying limb they were saying he was saying if you want to be a woman to be comedy and be a comedian you kind of have to adopt male characteristics you have to act like a slut. Or act like a guy or be Butch. Well, I don't agree not true, but not true because he's not a comedian. Here's a no. No, it's not true. But what is true is it's harder. It's a harder path for a woman. You have to be. Yes it is. Yeah and you have to be undeniable a dine.


You have to be a dominant Personality. Yeah, I'm saying like a Roseanne like Roseanne came out and she was now playing I'm gonna you know, I mean like you have to have that energy, I guess or Sarah Silverman She sends out her path through it. She was cute but you know, it was like her she would shock you with her take something. Well, it was like well crafted. Yes. It was who she was almost like a different I'll totally different but like Sam Kinison in the fact that you'd be like, oh this person saying this and then you like whoa. Whoa. Whoa. Well, it was like a joke. Yeah, and she was pretty so how you throw you off to Charming? Yeah. Yeah, and but Roseann was interesting in the same way. Kinnison was interesting because She became that person after she had a brain injury.


What yeah, she had hit by a car. Just like Kennison. I didn't know either one of them got hit by yeah before they did stand up. Yeah, they took their personalities changed its really interesting. They both got really hurt bad and when you get really bad brain injuries, one of the things that happens is you become ridiculously impulsive and wild and and oftentimes violent like that was the thing with kinnison like his brother wrote In the book My Brother Sam. His brother Bill wrote a book about Sam and what Sam was like before the accident and then after the accident he was hit by like I think he was hit by a pickup truck but like really fucked up like brain injury and then he became a different person like he was like quiet and reserved and then just became wild and uncontrollable.


Same thing with Roseanne. She went to a mental institute for nine months after she was hit by a car. How funny is that that people got to get hit by a truck. That's what does that say about us? What does it say? We're fucked? Yeah, what does it really say? Yeah, well because I believe in this a different vein, but the same psychologically, I believe you have to be at a place where you just it's almost like a existential crisis. Yeah. We like I don't care if I bomb I don't care about I don't I don't Place enough value in this planet that I give a shit. I'm going up and I'm talking about what I want to talk.


It's almost like a level of depression. That's not a it goes be up where you just like, I don't care. I really don't care what those people care about. This is public speaking Yeah so much that has to be something with us that's off. We're we're like I don't care or you have to develop it over time. You have to develop that callousness about the way people feel about eventually. Yeah, or you got to get so good that you can not you know that even though it's so terrifying. Vying to bomb you could slip through those Waters and ride the wave of success what I what I always tell people starting when they when they asked Yvonne they don't ask I tell them but is you can you always can hate you but they can never feel sorry for you.


The one thing you're not allowed to have in comedy in my opinion is the one thing you're not allowed to indulge in is you can't ever be uncomfortable, right? You can be anything. You could be an asshole. You could be a psycho you be offensive you can never be Uncomfortable. You're not allowed to be it, isn't it? Weirdly? You could feel it. Yeah, you feel it in someone's uncomfortable. You're not a lot if somebody if you paid somebody to come in right now and do a set for us three, then not allowed to be like, well, it's a weird it said they can they can say this setup sucks. You pay me for this fucker. They can attack us and will probably love bright but they can't be uncomfortable. Right? You're paid to not be uncomfortable right matter what?


Yeah, you can't be ashamed and you can't be uncomfortable. Anything else could be It is such a strange art forms, like they feel you. They feel how you feel. Even if the words come out perfect with the perfect timing. They feel how you feel and they won't laugh if you seem uncomfortable. Yes. Yeah, it's like alchemical or something. It's just is it's and it's such a it's such a value is always hate this even though it's true as a people decide how they feel about you the first ten seconds ago, but the fuck is that yeah judge me 10 seconds, but Truth is when somebody comes on stage and they don't make eye contact like with the crept like they like either looking down or looking above.


Yes right away the whole crowd knows and then like what's his part they go they uncomfortable you want then? Why you being comedian? Get off stage? Yeah. Do you have to be like, I don't give a shit just like with the Heckler like people had tried that too. Hey the Heckler, it's like no no, you will living vicariously through you in the old. Yeah the asshole at work that we can't say that too. Because we'll get a fire door get her ass kicked. You have to say that too. Yep, you know. Yeah, even if you don't say the greatest, it doesn't know it's clever thing in the world, but it has to be basically fuck you. You fucking idiot address coming here trying to fucking ruin it God fuck these people love it because they can live vicariously through that, you know, well such a classic person to yes Heckler such a classic person a person thinks their opinion is more important than the entire audience being to stand up.


Put a stop to it that their ego allows them to literally yell out to the person with the microphone. Yeah, nice shirt. Yeah. Yeah, it's so so yeah, some of those would be another beautiful thing about the store that was terrible, but also beautiful there was no crowd control. Oh, yeah. No one no one took care of the crowd. Now you had to develop the ability to handle shit. Yeah, when things are going sideways no one stopped anybody knowing kicked anybody out now and then eventually they did. Like in the you know, like the new version of the store like 2014 on when I came back they would fucking clean it out man. They wouldn't they wouldn't let anybody like Heckle anymore and I had this is interesting like these young guys coming up is good, but it's also bad.


Yes, you got to learn how to handle this chaos. And if you would go somewhere else one of the things you would go on the road and if you go on the road and people would Heckle you like Do you think I'm not used to this? I get heckled every night. Yes, like it was it's so now it's such a normal part of the experience. It has to be a normal part of the experience. I agree because there's nothing even as a guy's been in forever when somebody when you watch a comedian somebody heckles have and you see their faces like yeah, whatever like this style startled by it. Yes, what you want to see is like, okay asshole number six thousand in my life. Listen to me you fuck you don't we wanted to be like that outraged you want to just be like, oh you fuck you like it's part of the thing, you know exactly exact is that great Bill Hicks at where he's doing that with them, you know that recording member was like yelling at the whole crowd like oh, yeah.


Oh you two thinking just you reason the right actor. You just tell he's been doing it forever. Yeah, there was a lady yelled at him and he goes he goes. Oh, I'm a cunt he was I gotta I got a pussy. So I get carte blanche. I heard a recording of Lenny Bruce from 1959. There was this guy how we'll know just died. And he had all these old great recordings of music and everything, but it is Lenny Bruce recording 1959 and just let me listen to it once and it was Lenny Bruce at a club going just start. Listen to me. Here's what bothers me they always put you people at that table to because you always had that fucking for for you know for top and and you can tell there's a couple of couples it goes your two couples that want to you know, you think your clay you're drunk it goes in after the show you going to come up and go we were helping you.


And I think that was in 1959 and that crazy because that is what they say. Yeah. Yeah, we were helping you yelled at if we didn't yell out you wouldn't even have a shot. Yeah, if you didn't if you didn't show up tonight, I would have been screwed. I wouldn't have a show. It's funny that people actually do think that though. It's like a comedy is kind of like a form of hypnosis. That's what I always say like when a guys on stage killing like if you're on stage and you're killing and I'm sitting there watching even though I know I'm a comic right? I let you think for me is thinking for me. So you're saying things and I'm just an empty. I'm on the ride with you, right? It's letting you think for me. Yeah, and the whole audience does it to get like it's a such a weird art form where you were tapping into these states of mind that aren't really available to other people the State of Mind where there's a person on stage and their their their crafting and experience and everyone else in the audience is sort of going along with it if it's going well and you and it's accentuated by the people next to you who are also laughing at I know and Speaking of covid that's what makes you nervous.


She like shit if people have to be next to you. Yeah, really to really make it work for an hour. Yeah, you know, I think we're going to look past this. I think they're going to come up with some sort of a treatment or something within two years. We're going to at the very least have a real appreciation for what it's like to lose this. Well, yes, and I think that Austin comedy club is I'm a little too big to just run one Club. So how many going to run? Well, I mean a chain of something Oops, okay, you know where else well so Nashville, yeah, I've watched probably 50 episodes of Bar Rescue like most people so I understand what to do when I go into the place. I understand the culture. Yeah, not Nashville because they have Zanies.


That's who I'll respect a real institution like Zanies. Maybe you could be Comedy Club rescue and come in with like you have to have a hook like a polkadot suit or something crazy. All right. I was like I didn't like it the message. Yeah, when We don't believe I love it Sophia. How about a chain of like where this where they ceiling like in case covid-19 comes back with a retractable ceiling so you can have a skylight comp the sky like okay, it's gonna be expensive but I'm sure it's a lot cheaper than I think you outside only works in the Sun the thing about they're saying about being outside of the only good thing about outside outside is circulation, like people are breathing your face like the air is not trapped.


So real the way. Eat that outside works is like UV light and sun is supposed to kill covid. Well, I'm going to say something that gives I don't care if people get sick from covid. I'm just I want to Market it so people think they're safe. I don't really give a shit while I pay that cover. How about a fan? This is a goddamn business blows all the bad air away. You know, what do you got that said Drew and working for, you know, r.j. Reynolds in 1950. Hey, listen cigarettes a bass. Do you think you would live outside of New York City ever? No, seriously? I mean I seem like you're inexorably tied to that City. I mean, I feel like I am but I'm like I said, I know a lot of my family is moving a lot of people I know are moving to the suburbs in the past six months seven months.


Mmm and sometimes I'm like, yeah, this is It's kind of there's something there's something not there in New York. Sometimes when I'm like, it's not it's not how it used to feel about me. Let's just put it that way. Maybe it's me, but I think it's the city. How long did you go without telling stand up? How long did I go during the covid for months five months and then would what was your first show was the was the you know, the one with the cars at the parking lot one. That was the first real max. Yeah. The first one was a recording. Yeah. Really Chris De Stefano was on the if you know him and he goes, yeah, this is great. We used to walk her acts out. Now you like at work it out on HBO Max.


Wow, so you didn't warm up for it at all. You just went up and did it? Yeah. Wow, I didn't warm up but like, you know, I listen to my tapes and shit. Yeah, you know, that's kind of crazy who's crazy but it's you know stand up. Is it after you doing it for that long? You kind of you know, you could still bomb but you know, it's a little different plus the crowds you're not doing an hour. I was doing an hour. It's a different ball game. I did the Houston Improv did a And thereafter, I think I did in July so. Four months five months whatever it was four months and it was weird me Tony Hinchcliffe and Brian Moses and it was so strange.


It was like but it felt so good and we doing an hour is a different ball game. It was headlining. I mean I was doing about realize what headlining. Yeah. Yeah. I mean they pay to see you. It's a different. I was lucky though that I actually had already worked out this hour over a year or so. So it was a real our I had recordings. I could listen to recordings. I had all my notes. I go over my notes. The first show is like can I do this? And then once I did it, I was like I remember all this shit then the SEC Isaac like I might have fucked up a few tag lines or something like that. But by the end of the weekend, it was like a real show. I was Rollin. So did you how many times you listen to yourself before? You want a lot a lot me until I always got ya play games.


I yeah, I don't either I record all my sets and I listen to them. Usually I would listen to him. I would drive home from the store. I would listen to on the way home. But this is the difference between yeah people that really want to last. If you don't respect you have to respect it enough to go. Hey, guess what these people in Houston paid to see? Yes. I'm going to do my best. It might not be perfect. It's going to be the best. I put all my effort in. Yeah, then you really, you know you doing it you might be a little clumsy of you haven't done stand-up in five months. But yeah, we're gonna do the work that's required to get it done. Then there is no that you care. That's right. Yeah, the worst is when someone pays to see you and you see the person on stage like a notebook like what else what else and they don't give a fuck else.


The worst is the worst because this that feeling that you don't have a sense of urgency that these people have paid to hear you talk. Yeah, a lot of people that's like a little defense mechanism for them like a McGill fucks just to show like I always called The Joe DiMaggio principal like when I saw this article once were Joe DiMaggio was like 40 years old or something. He was already in the Hall of Fame and he slid into third base and there's this kid's head. You know, you play so hard like, why are you doing this? Like you're already in the Hall of Fame and this and that and he goes because somewhere out there. There's someone who hasn't seen Joe Dimaggio play and I don't want to let him down. Yeah, it's great. I remember reading that and going that is a great way to look at it.


That's a great way to look at it. Like if people are paying to see you they're paying money. Do you feel like you used that line on Marilyn Monroe first time? He's probably like, I don't know Marilyn, but you know, I figure somebody just like what a nice guy cut it now will later. Well, his thing was always kind of sad right like she left. Tim and she was banging all these other guys and they said that even after his after her death, he would always show up at her grave and leaving hours. That's sad shit. Yeah, but I already treated like shit at me like smack her something did he I could be making up some her. I'm slamming the name of the Great American Hero. I'm calling Joe DiMaggio wife beater based on something I may or may not have read. I don't know.


Maybe I feel like a traitor is feel like he's Italian. I feel yeah. Well that's part of it. And I feel like he'd beat her and then all the Miller emotionally abused are the Kennedys killed her and Kenny. Well, yeah that most likely that kind of stuff you do wonder you know my like Wonder, you know, if I had a $100,000 on a bet yes or no red or black. I'm going with a killer it certainly was a strange one wasn't it? Well, she was apparently she had loose lips and she fucked both of them and she was drinking and I got this. Yeah, I fucked Bobby Orr knows about Jack yeah, but it was like yeah. Yeah, but his I don't understand if they killed her.


They had the mob do it for him and somebody because but the mob hated them so why would they do it? Well, what doesn't necessarily have to be the mob. I mean you think Hillary Clinton's using the mob to whack all those people know, there is this is people out there. That'll kill people for you Colin. Yeah, I guess it 100% Yeah, they exist. Yeah, and they don't have a problem with it because they've killed people before it's not that hard. It's it's shockingly easy to get some Kill somebody for you. Yeah, I guess for you know for money when asked if you're a president United States and you got some lady who won't shut the fuck up about blowing you in the Rose Garden.


Well, whatever nowadays though. It's a lot harder, you know what I mean? Because everything gets Exposed on you know, social media, but I mean, yeah back in those days you get away with it. I'm sure it to Epstein. I'm shipping a the killed that guy when he's in prison. Yeah. Well in prison is easier. Well, yeah, they turn of the camera. They turn off all the cameras but still But if that was in the street 80 people have cameras Epstein. Hey Jeff, that's true. Maybe it's easier to kill in prison. I think it is. Yeah, but this is one time that he's dead. Yeah. I miss him. Everybody said God. Yeah. The God was just wanted to sleep in one was just yeah, and the whole cameras are broken. I don't know what happened weird.


He broke his own neck strange just really feels bad about having sectionals 16 year olds now. Yeah, but I mean the minute that list. Well, what about Jews Ain Maxwell was going to happen with her. That's a good question because she doesn't go to I don't think she goes to trial until I want to say next month. I think she goes to try this month now. We're in October Jamie. When is she supposed to go on trial? You don't hear a word about that right now? She's getting the jack cheese into Jack Ruby cell. I read a fascinating book next year next year. What the fuck are they waiting for? Yeah. To figure out how do you know they're waiting for that's crazy next year when next year next December.


Yeah. What are we gonna do it? Why would they wait? That's so weird. They look they put Harvey Weinstein right in the court. Why are they waiting for her? That's so strange. hmm There was a report recently that Bill Clinton had a an intimate dinner with her a couple years back. She Zane we got to talk. Yeah, you know, there is zero Ledger. She's just an I'd bail recently and current trial date is set for July 12 2021. That's a long time. That's a long chive 20 bucks this seventh month of July of of 2021.


And here we are in October. Yeah, that's crazy. That's Much time to kill her. Yeah. Well, I mean nowadays will be easy just you put covid on the side of one of the surfaces and wafer to sniffing not good enough. What about something to kill her? What about you were saying some other Kennedy but Jack Ruby. Oh, yeah, there's a fascinating book called chaos written by this guy Tom O'Neill. I had them on the podcast and it's all about the CIA and the cia's. Well, it's about the Manson case, but how this guy Tom O'Neill who's actually Greg. Fitzsimmons neighbor it's an amazing book. He researched this book over 20 years. He started writing it and then as he was writing it he was writing it as an article and as he's writing the article he kept uncovering more and more and more information and he connected the Manson family to the CIA operatives that would give people LSD and they would run these experiments on people and they think that they use the Manson family to to discredit the hippie movement.


And to experiment with what they could do with LSD and they did it with him while he was in prison and what the guy that was involved in this CIA LSD operation. This is all like heavily documented was the same guy who went to visit Oz excuse me, Jack Ruby when he was in jail after he killed Oswald and Jack Ruby like from this guy visiting him in jail immediately went crazy was hiding underneath the table was saying that they're burning Jews in the streets and like He had a meltdown and they think this guy Dost Jack Ruby while he was in jail and might have dosed him previous to that to get him to shoot Jack Ruby the order to get him to shoot Oswald in the first place.


Wow, it's crazy. They connect this CIA MKUltra mind control LSD experiments that they were doing with this guy. What is his name? Jolly was in Jolly West Jolly West. Who is this this operative? For the CIA. They ran a thing called Midnight Club operation midnight climax where they would run brothels with two-way mirrors and they would hire these hookers to give these John's LSD and they would watch to see like how they would react to, you know, they would give them a drink and inside the drink that would be acid and these poor guys thought they were going, you know, you have some sex with the lovely lady poor guys. They get it they get sex and they get a free Jansen trip.


I don't see what's so bad about not bad. If you know, you're gonna have an ass to Trout What about the great book though? It's called chaos. Chaos, because you know Gabe Kaplan, you know, there was a comedian and poker player. Yeah, and he worked he told me what time because yeah, I work for Jack Ruby. He worked for the carousel Club. Whatever the name of the club was. He worked in the Dallas area I go. What was he like he goes, he was a real thug. He goes, he was just like hey get out of here. Like you just shut up here, you know just it was a real a mob care of my people the Dallas mob. I mean you read that book about the Dallas mom. And Lyndon Johnson and his any know. What was that book? I have it on my phone, but I mean the it was but it was basically it was like the most compelling argument.


I felt like wow like the Dallas mob being involved with whoever they were involved with to go out and to go out and really kill, you know, kill the guy, you know, it completely makes sense here. That's Jamie's got it here betrayal and Dallas. Yes, that's it. Huh good is the J mod. Damn Cheney Jamie. You know what betrayal doesn't get tested L who LBJ the Pearl Street Mafia and the murder of President Kennedy. Yeah Pro stuff. Oh my God, it's great because it connects the lieutenant governor like who is not going to get reelected and it was all like LBJ stuff. It was really good take a picture of that so that I can get it later so I don't forget but but but the man said thing is the mass of things crazy Tom O'Neill documents all the times.


They let Manson out of jail. They would arrest him while he was on Parole right? We're clear parole violations and one of them was that's the book right there. I can't tell you enough good things about it, but they kept releasing him and one of the one of the sheriff said that was above my paygrade like they told him the CIA came to them and they'll let the guy go and they wanted him to go out and keep doing all this crazy shit and one of the reasons why they want to do is because they wanted to discredit the anti-war movement like the CIA and the government at the time was involved in a lot of like really shady shit. But and one of the reasons why they were doing that was because they were trying to stop what they thought was this subversive.


Of movement pure to try to get us out of Vietnam. Right? Right, and this was a part of it. I mean the Kennedy thing was a part of it too. I guess really yeah, you know for sure. I mean they just happen to have the happy. I mean this book I was talked about as more like the Dallas Mafia, but I'm sure the CIA say they it's going to help us go. You know, I mean, they weren't together in the Bay of Pigs who want to be together in this. Well, it's really crazy that the video of the Kennedy assassination. The Zapruder film was actually put on television by comedian Dick Gregory. Did Gregory brought that to Geraldo Rivera's TV show and I think it was 10 years after the Order something Mighty Big 12 now maybe like Ryan Barrett.


Barrett TV shows like 74. I remember. Yeah, it was what back when people had bell bottoms on and shit. Yep and Dick Gregory brought that film there. It is. Good night America 75, there it is. Wow. So c75. Yeah, March 675 look how blurry it is. Yeah. Good night America. Yeah, and so they played the Kennedy because Dick Gregory with what a fascinating guy he was Oh, yeah, great fucking comic great comic a lot of people don't even know how good he was. Well time-life had this cot. They had purchased this, you know after the assassination in 63 and they held on to it all these years and they played it on television and I remember Geraldo Rivera telling people that this is going to be very disturbing and you could see him getting shot.


He sees head going back into the left and everybody was like, wait. What the fuck? Going on it's that's the first time and seeing him grab his neck where he got shot in the front in the neck and when they tried to in the autopsy, they had two different versions of it in Dallas. They said it was an entry wound and then in Bethesda, Maryland when they looked at them there they said oh no, that's a tracheotomy. They shot him in the neck shot him in the back shot him in the neck shot him in the head. They were shoot down from different angles. Yeah, who's more than one partner? Yeah. Yeah, I guarantee ya. I mean, I don't guarantee but I'm a lot of life don't think that's that's the weirdest are. Argument when people think that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone that is one of the weirdest arguments that the the weird mental gymnastics that people have to play with themselves to get to the position where they think Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone.


Yeah. Well, I'd like to see a movie. I mean JFK was good for what it was but I like to see a movie about all the people that got killed in the aftermath. Oh a lot of people that thou me good movie. There's a book called best evidence by this guy David lifted and David lift and was an accountant. Who is hired to do something with the Kennedy assassination? I forget what it was hard to do. But he went over the entire Warren Commission. And you know, it's a huge many, you know, many many many many pages, right and he found all these inconsistencies and all these things wrong with it and all these things that don't make any sense and he realized like they put this together to try to wrap it up tight and and make it seem like there was an obvious conclusion, but it wasn't an examination like an objective examination of the assassination because in those days The the mob and the CIA were as powerful as any and they would not play and get it was just tell you look man.


If you do this. Yeah, don't do this. They don't even have to tell you what's going to happen. You knew it was gonna happen kill the prize. Like don't do this if we kill him. You don't think will kill you and so many of the people that were Witnesses wound up dead. Well so many of the people there's some I was thinking hitless in depth investigation to the mysterious Bowser's Belzer Belzer is a nut how funny is that? How funny and he's conspiracy guy always so deep but how funny is this? Isn't that title of his book? You know because you lost the testicular cancer Billy his conspiracy book is called one lone nut. That's pretty funny. It's pretty funny. He had another book called UFOs Bigfoot in flying saucers.


I think Elvis Bigfoot and flying saucers. That's it. Thank you. That's another book that I read of his that is an all Conspiracy Theory Book, you know, he's all about conspiracy theories. I had a conversation with I only met him once but we had a long conversation about UFOs and Bigfoot and aliens and he's up. He that motherfucker believes everything right? He's like he's all in yes, some people just predisposed to be they love them. I think they just you know is another one like that Dan Aykroyd. Oh, really? Oh my God. I had him on the podcast. He believes in Then go psychics you name it all that extraterrestrial all of it. Everything's real.


He probably thinks the crystal skulls all of it everything. He's all in Wells like really it was it was a weird conversation. I was like like he didn't have any skepticism but it wasn't like who fucking knows there was none of that was another that he was all in all in all in on psychics all in on Bigfoot all in on UFOs. Is all in he was the he was the oldest 23-year who's on SNL? He's 23 was he really? Yes. He seemed like he was like 40. Yeah, but I like this idea. I though I'd like this out. Yeah, but I like this idea of doing this all the people that got killed after JFK.


Yeah, you know, I mean nothing I'm not discrediting belches book, but it doesn't look like the kind of thing. I was envisioning. I want to know morning by some investigative reporting not biased and up there all got murdered Park their cars on. Train tracks jumped off a building on my days off at Austin comedy. I'm going to drive to Dallas two days a week and start researching for the movie one thing you do. If you do drive around there, there's there's nothing that drove me crazy. I was like the scope on the rifle didn't even work like we talking about how do you know it didn't work but look, what does that mean? Because when they've got it didn't work if you have a scope on a rifle you just drop the rifle that scope doesn't work. Well, it's yeah like a scope on a rifle is of like if you You fall and this happened to me once on a hunting trip.


I fell and my rifle was off. We we took it back to the ranger was off by 6 inches at a hundred yards with a like on a rest where you just squeeze off rounds. It was it was when you knock a rifle. Like if you fall down the rifle drops, it's going to adjust the scope and you're shooting a bullet, you know, a couple hundred yards or a hundred yards any little wiggle like if it's a 1/8 of an inch to the left or the right you're going to be Way off by the time it gets to the Target. So when all these people were saying, well the scope and the rifle didn't even work. Well, like what are you talk? You don't know that but they found this thing sitting he could have dropped it after he shot JFK. I think Lee Harvey Oswald was probably in on it.


I think he was probably a nice probably one of them, but I think they definitely when he said he was a patsy. Yeah like yeah, most likely. Yeah. Yeah the Patsy he came by the way, what was it better description of the JFK assassination than Full Metal Jacket hoses. Great. Well, yeah my best outstanding. Yes. Oh, yeah, that was really beautiful. It was the way he said it like he was just like hey guess what? Yeah life is life is hard. What does what I say about this thing. Also letting prepping these guys to be killers and that what you're rewarding is someone who's really good at killing even if he shot the fucking president. Yeah. It's like I don't give a shit what happened?


I'm just telling you this guy was a marine. What is this guy? Emery Lee Ann Marie, really a Maria God. Damn, he was good. He was so good in that role. Did they say he was there to advise and then they just hired scene play that let me hear that. It's not working what we got here. Is it no audio in the actual? This is a professional show here. That was Spotify. Yeah, but look where the way they shot it like this clouds overhead. Dreary, I bet he loved the fact that it was dreary that day to you.


Got it. Oh no Charles Whitman was none of your dumb ass is Knows by The Cowboy sir. He was that guy who shot all those people from that Tower and Austin Texas serve that's affirmative Charles Whitman killed brain tumor my 28 story observation tower at the University of Texas from distances of up to 400 yard. Anybody know who Lee Harvey Oswald was Private snowball. So he shot Kennedy sir. That's right. And do you know how far away? He was sure. It was pretty far from that book suppository building sir.


Alright, knock it off. 250 feet it was 250 feet away and shooting at a moving Target Oswald got off three rounds with an old Italian bolt action rifle and only six seconds and scored two hits including a head shot. Do any of you people know where these individuals learned how to shoot? I'm a joker, sir in the Marine sir, and the Marines outstanding one motivated for marine and his rifle can do and before you ladies leave my Island go. Oh, I'll be able to do the same thing.


That's great. Dialogue Kubrick was so good. What motivated individual he's like does it matter what it means in the grand scheme of things you wear brains? I'm just telling you something. We're training you but it was such a great scene to because Kubrick is really highlighting. Like what has to go on with it taking a regular kid and turning him into a killer. Yeah. Yeah, like you're really brainwashing on me. That was brainwashing. Yeah. Oh, absolutely. Yeah, they all said they also sell good his movies were so goddamn good, you know, he's to do like complex mathematics in his spare time. He did. Yes for fun. Well, I don't understand what complex math is but one time was an hour.


No McDonald, and we've been elevated of these coaches knowing Donald in the elevators very, you know, he'll just destroy he will literally say the worst thing you can say about someone and then leave and you left it with all the people that's his thing one of his things but there's two guys were talking about some complex mathematics things and then late and he's at 30 Rock and they're saying this like we I didn't even understand what language it was. It was a really deep mathematic thing and then nor McDonald would never brought up math or any Like that to be in this life goes that and start speaking to them in this like what sounded like tongues and they're like, oh, you know, but and they start speaking the binary out and he has had by and he said speaking this man manic talk and then they leave and then he goes to me like yeah.


Yeah, those guys are nerds or something like that and I was like, but how do you know that? How did you know what they were talking about? How did he know? He's like, oh, you know, he's a nerd to see, you know, something deep like he knows these things sometimes. He's a very smart guy really smart. Yes guys are just you know, just pretend not to know something that yeah, that's right. And then you like what enemy wash it and when we just you knows what they're talking about, you know? Yeah, he's the guy that really should have had a podcast a long fucking time ago. And I know he's doing something now. He sent me a text message the other day that he's starting to do a podcast now. Hey, Joan, do what I had cast doing that thing we talked about he should have done a lot of because he had that show on Netflix.


But yeah. Not they muzzle them when he went on the Howard Stern Show, right? And he was saying something and he didn't want to say retarded. So he said you'd have to have Down syndrome believe that could be a better thing to say but here's the thing about Norm. I'm not absolutely sure if he thought that would be a better thing to say right in every so smart. He might have been doing it as a double troll. Ya know Norm is capable of the Double Trouble was like, yeah. I don't want to say retarded Down syndrome. Hit that double troll exactly as he's the master of that stuff. I randomly wound up sitting next to him on planes twice on two different occasions.


Just like a golden turm like out of nowhere. I said next to me one time. He's we're sitting there. We're talking. We're having a good old time and then he's talking about quit smoking. He's tell me how he quit smoking and fucking yeah, finally quit smoking and he's telling me all these things then when he lands he literally like he can't stop himself. Runs into the airport store and buy cigarettes and he's lighting it as he's losing I go. I thought you quit he was I did but now that talking about smoking makes me want one and he's like before he even got out the door. He's lighting the cigarette. He just couldn't stop himself and I like to goes all that talk and he's the one talking about all that talk and he always puts it on you.


It was great, but it was like this guy's talked about smoking. He got me back smoke but it was so crazy because I was like, that's great Norm. So great you can Wit and he's like I want a cigarette. I always feel like that guy. I mean, I don't drink and I quit drinking it was like, oh really? Did you drink a lot? Yeah. I quit. I quit. I finally had to quit, you know, it's hard but I didn't like oh because yeah because I got fucking wasted last night. I said, I'm never gonna drink again. I was drunk and be like wait, I thought you quit. Yeah. I quit as I'm saying, you know last night. It's like an elaborate like Abbott and Costello. Yes, exactly. Well the gambling to he fucking loves gambling loves it.


Oh, yeah, but that's a thing like a lot of these great Comics are like really impulsive. Yeah. It's like something about like the ability to say some of the crazy shit that he says, it's you have to have this this like hot wire. Yeah, it's just like yeah, you just want to touch it. Ah, yep. Oh, no, he's he's For the books. Yeah, look at that the conspiracy theory thing is an interesting. It's an interesting little Obsession that a lot of people have. Yeah, like the wanting to uncover the secrets to wanting to to know get to the bottom of things find out how it all works who killed Epstein who killed Kennedy, right?


Yeah. Be koala Kennedy one is so it really the what was so amazing to is you see the country change because almost like Consciously the whole country knew that this was something else that was kind of the beginning of the destruction and down for now, you know and maybe empty seven fucking years ago to that's what's crazy and there's still yeah, there's still a mystery and it's like they got away with it. Whoever did it got away with who did is long gone. Yeah this idea that everybody gets caught for things like not not everything is an episode of Law & Order Dow and they took to all those anytime they need to be those mob guys, you know, they all say that stuff, you know, I mean, they all say Well, I heard this I heard that when I don't know but this is what I heard.


Yeah, you know and I'm sure it's you know, it's a bad you wanna go. Yeah, I know what's happening. But still, you know, yeah. Well that was the other weird thing about New York for years and years and years rise. It New York was essentially run by the mob Johnny help clean that up too. Oh, yeah, he'd be busted. They were I mean, he he helped clean up in the 80s. Yeah, when he was hit he took he he did that commission case, you know what I mean? See how this one guy Giuliani was responsible for a lot of the Improvement in New York City. Yeah a lot. Oh, yeah, like sometimes it takes one guy like that. It was he's like the Buford Pusser of New York City the because the Yakima tall taking it Taking the fish market down was I was everybody was going he's gonna get killed really when he went into the point.


He became a when it's explain to people the whole well, like the you know, the mob ran like like Joe saying Sanitation Like even things like I was in the restaurant Union, so I didn't know you know, and I've spent my dues. I'm like an idiot and then but like all they were in the restaurant but then when you run the restaurant and you don't just run the bar tenders in the waiters, you run the Linen Supply like the mob was Linen Supply and the liquor distributors. I call the my you know mob kids when they weren't, you know, when they were just related somebody to be driving the liquor trucks, you know is all it was, you know, and the food to meet, you know, maybe they had the famous. Amos thing with the Frank Perdue and chicken is done.


So they really ran like, you know, they run an industry but there's like 20 jobs that are close to the industry where they involved, you know, and a lot of guys had no show jobs and also show Johnson Chad buddy, Matt the Javits Center exactly. You just said it. I had a friend of mine who had a no-show job at the Javits Center. Oh, yeah. I know a few people worked over the Javits Center that look at Giuliani back then like, right, right. Yeah, and they take them off you put an Now our bounty on his head sure amazing didn't kill him. What is it? Amazing that they didn't? Yeah, I guess I guess there was still a few of the old timers that like we don't do and I mean we're still though thing about the United States like we don't kill them doing their job, I guess, you know, yes, but it was interesting because you try they just couldn't get to maybe but it was also that law that was a You know that guy that it all came from that Rico.


Yeah, that was some Professor just came about this morning somebody in the DA's office or somebody else. That's a great we could use that law. I figured out worried. That was an interesting story racketeering. Yeah, there's some guy that had this concept of a law, but it wasn't it was like Upstate New York or something. Yeah, I mean and that's how they got them all and that's how it'll end up taking. I mean, they're still around obviously, you know, but it's you ever hear that guy Michael franchise, you know, that is I've seen him be interviewed and yeah fast Charismatic guy right what's fascinating that he's just out there running around? Yeah, but I guess he didn't rat anybody out or something. I was like just like and I said, you know that Generations gone, so they're probably just like the hell with it. But you know, what the fuck was the guy's name the the hit man for for gaudy that oh Sammy the bull Sammy the bull gravano, right?


Yeah. He's out to like them in a bowl. Yeah of interviewed him to like long interviews long-form interviews just said talk to him about I mean, he's a murderer just out there wandering around. Yeah and even got arrested later in his life for selling ecstasy. Yeah. Well it was trying to get you know, trying to keep young. He said it was this Hit Man Sammy the bull gravano is now a social media star promoting his own podcast and showing off his cozy new family life in Arizona 35 years after turning on the Gambino family and John Gotti. Wow, he's 75 and he's just starting spot. He's like no, I'm he's just under the pot. They should know podcast again. Look at them. They're two guys that should have Looks great.


He does look good. He looks great. E75. He looks fucking great. Well, they always said about him was he would go to the gym. The other guys would go out. He wouldn't stay out late at night. You know, that's kind of crazy and he's doing a podcast just like Hillary Clinton. Yeah murderer Stone podcast. Yeah. Look how good he looks though. That's so weird. Joey doesn't look that good. I don't know what keeps go back to that. Go back to the picture. Come on. If I look that good at 75, come on. Look at that. He looks fucking good there. You gotta admit for a 75 year old guy. Yeah. I mean he looks he looks use the same microphones. We use Jamie coincidence.


It looks 65 know. They're very good. He looks good. I'll just goes to show nice to my like that, you know about 62. He was about 62 13 years younger than it really is. That's right. I say for that picture. Yeah these podcasts any good. Yeah, we have yes, I bet it's a I don't know. I don't go on that many only gonna happen if I kiss how many people thought was. What would he ask me? Let me ask you, you know, these mob guys are gonna kill another best in the best company, maybe yes, maybe Michael French hazy could tell stories. Well for Jay-Z seems more like indeed. I like he was like a you know, yeah. Well, I like a guy like this we would understand he is a very charismatic guy friends.


Yes. Yeah, but um, who knows how many people might be, you know enemies get that street. He's got that street intelligence. You know, how many guys are in jail for life? Life from selling pot there watching these guys doing these podcasts of killed nine people go. What the fuck kind of shit is this what kind of lawyer did I have the movies? Like listen, where's the hundred million? The Bales franchisee a hundred million mizzen has got a hundred million Birds somewhere. It's Gotta look. Nice. See he looks like a former mob boss leave that nice suit. He's wearing yes really well-dressed. And how did he how is he out? How much time did he have to do? I don't know, but he did I know he's in jail, but But he wasn't in there for murder.


He was in there for some kind of that. My mother gasoline. There's a big gasoline thing in the 80s. I don't know how they did it. But it was just one of those, you know things with the Russian mob and he was involved with them. And so yeah, I sold billions of gallons of gas. The family would collect the state and local gas taxes, but keep the money instead at the same time. They were often selling the gas at lower prices. Then legitimate gas stations The mid-1980s Fortune Magazine listed French AZ as number 18. On its list of top 50 top 850 wealthiest and most powerful gangsters in the world that can be configured who made billions of dollars over the years not only for himself, but for the five families as well by 1984 his greatest net worth was a staggering 20 billion dollars making him one of the richest Kuwait is of all time.


Wait a minute. Nobody's wash it nobody's worth 20, but nobody is worth twenty billion dollars in 1984. So was he was what are you Wikipedia is line. I'm yeah even Bill Gates wasn't worth night 20 billion dollars in 1985 Frenchie's. He was indicted on 14 counts of racketeering counterfeit erring counterfeiting in exhaustion extortion and the gasoline bootleg racket 1986 franchisee pleaded guilty on two counts. He was sentenced to 10 years in federal prison with 14 million in restitution payments in the guy's worth 20 billion and ain't shit. This is a square is a hundred billion hundred million is so what is he doing now? First of all, he has 20 billion.


Is he why is only a hundred million buried I would have buried 10 biggest questions keep scrolling down that page and the 20 billion. What does it say at the bottom? I want to find out what that was me. When did he get out? He's a motivational speaker. Now, this is how you steal. What if we got out in 89 I got re sentence for violating his parole term. So what did he do to get arrested for tax fraud and lips and back to universities. We started making the balance of the court-ordered restitution payments earlier. That year prosecutors also said franchisee was not considered by the government to be a cooperating witness. That's why he's alive. He was at least in 94.


Wow. Wow, interesting. Oh, yeah. So he made an autobiography way. Sounds like a fucking Hustler, right that's been interviewed by Jim Rohn. Obviously a smart guy. He persuaded New York Yankees players who owed money to the Colombo Loan Sharks to fix baseball games for betting purposes. Holy shit. At 2003 French AZ published blood Covenant and updated and expanded life story. He's out now because I mean he's out out there jumping 25 years, but I mean, he's out there doing things. They saw him being interviewed by somebody recently on YouTube. Yeah. Yeah because I'm sure you know, like you said he didn't give you didn't cooperate and most of those guys are dead.


Anyway, wait a minute. They contacted me. Yeah, really recently. I got a request to have them on step bring them on. Good point just in case you piss him off. Yeah, there he is. Okay, he's been view. No he's yeah, but that value tainment guy. That guy does a very good show. He's on on YouTube. Yes. He's very yeah, he's very good. He's gotta see him, please. Yeah, he's got a bunch of YouTube show. Look confident comfortable there guys out of jail. Looking good. Nice little pocket scarf. Yeah. Gentleman, like it looks like a real mobster.


Yea, I wonder if we set the Palm shows club that night. So know what I was friends with Fitzsimmons Fitzsimmons lived in Little Italy and he lived right above the social club where John Gotti and and all those guys used to go. He lived right there. I went to visit him. I was like Jesus Greg like he was right there. Laughs. Yeah. He like he rented this place like the the so Old Italian couple that's really yeah. He was right there like right here. You see those guys walking down this right walking to the Social Club. Oh my God, they probably had checked out make sure it wasn't, you know, God can give me a federal agent, you know, but this is Simmons has that look the facade has acted.


No, there's no way it's too funny. It's also like the those days like when the mob Ran New York is like the mob ran Vegas, like everybody has his romantic Notions those days, but again, Just like gritty New York City as long as they weren't fucking you over exactly. It's all fine until you trying to you know, get paid like that. Great Richard Pryor were to remember that one. What was that? Which angle right right trying to get paid by the mom because this left only pulls a gun to the good old days. Yeah. Yeah, but I mean but yeah, of course you Miss New York, whatever flavor, you know Jake that's what you miss is whatever that other intangible thing was.


Yeah Madness but it did give like you said Times Square cleaned up. It was the worst Times Square was horrible. I mean I hated time everybody hated Time Square and then it got cleaned up and right away. We like it. Looks like Disneyland it did get to be like a big Applebee's like we're saying it really did get various became like a Like just real chain. Yes a chain restaurant feel like that was one of the downfalls was changed but the Omens are good. Do you know I mean like small business owners weren't going to be in do you know they weren't able to afford the rent here in the small business owners were all points to us before that. Well, that was also when you got there like Caroline's changed that Caroline's is right on Broadway.


Remember Caroline's at one point. I was like you guys none of you people are from here like Caroline's became like this tourist trap, right, you know. No, yes, like if you want like if you did Gotham you got New York City people, but if you did Caroline's you were kidding like all tourist. Yeah, it was weird raw from Kansas and shit. Yeah first time in New York. Well people would say that if you want to a good test of your act to see if it work nationally was Caroline's that's it became yeah because like you said, it was really tourists. Yeah, but it wasn't always like that when I lived in New York Caroline's was like a real New York club right now. Yeah, but because they cleaned up Times Square they cleaned up Caroline's to yeah, because people didn't want us to go to Times Square in the old days.


I mean the 80s nobody wants to go to Tom School unless you up to some devious Behavior. There's no point to be in there is Dangerfield still open. Thank you feels is exactly the same. How is it possible that it's still open? Well, maybe ask your doctor friend change me. He's selling gas on the back. There's a feels has not changed in 35 years. I was like three years ago. I was laughing so hard. I used to love that club though. I love it you throw because you do you really work out? No, nobody was there. Nobody's a 30-minute sets. Do you remember Bobby the doorman? Of course Bobby big old fucking Scottish guy powerlifter Bobby. I saw him pick a man up by his neck.


Some guy was heckling. He grabbed the man, but he Bobby was an enormous human being. Yeah grab the man by his neck and lifted him up in the air carried him out. Like he had one hand on his belt one hand his neck because he was such a He picked the guy up like the guy was an empty suitcase. But even that's it old school technique for bouncer by the belt and the next one. Is that the great? Yeah, Bobby Bobby Hit. He goes you'd get off stage. Even if you killed it goes. Well, you tricked him again with that bag of shite for an act. It was a great place because I knew I knew that kinnison had performed there and Rodney Dangerfield did those Dangerfield specials there?


And I mean it was it was His spot it was amazing, but you would go there and was like, why is this place is empty. Yeah, I understand. Yeah, they need only money and prom season and I guess I did promise shows there. I didn't with Auto and George. I don't George and I did prom shows. Those are fun. There were wild. They're wild they never they never rotated the show. They were just put in more people like and they told you you did. They told you to never change your act because they wanted people to leave. So folks don't know what prom shows. Prime shows are you would get there? And this is no bullshit. You might do a 7 p.m. Show and you might do five shows a night. So your last show might be like 2 o'clock in the morning.


Yeah, and you would leave it there. It would be light out. Yep. I mean it was crazy. It was it really did many more 17 years old high school kids and they're leaving their prom and they would get him in there on limos and pump them into the club and the kids were hammered and drunk. Yep. Yeah. I saw a kid go on stage and took the microphone away from Ow, lubell and blue cigar-smoking a fit in his face. Also Jesus. This is rough. It's a rough show. It was wild man and they were so dumb these kids they were so stupid. I don't George was on he was fucking hilarious. This gives like I could see his lips moving his lips are moving. He was mad that you could see the rich will get slips.


Ha ha ha. Oh, he didn't even care. That was some of the funniest fucking material so funny. Do you remember when he had a Kennedy head? Did you ever send one Auto and George had a Kennedy how he you know, George the dummy he had rigged this thing up where George's head would flap back and it would like expose his brain and he was working on this thing. We would have like a Kennedy head and he said that he goes. Yeah, I want to get it so it squirts blood so I can get blood to squirt out of his head. But I mean, it was really I mean, I guess it won't like that but he is such a sick relationship with that. Goddamn did George oh, it was weird. It was like an episode of The Twilight Zone. It really was. Yeah. It was a couple of people told stories about the time it be out and you know, somebody would say something and I would just go crazy and attack them for you from verbally abusing the dummy.


Well Puerto Rican guy stabbed the dumbest right age one, right? That's right. I don't remember where that was. But I remember the story I moved to story he was sometimes have to check on the dummy like go like open that trunk. I gotta check on George. Judge. Yeah, it's Optical. He was with a girl one time if you get that story because something with the girl and she said some of them the demigods he stays with me and he went crazy and she was ran into the Twilight Zone. There's something about dummy acts. There's something Duncan Trussell used to have this dummy and someone stole it is dummy was little hobo and little hobo the act in the act the dummy was Grandfather's dummy and his grandfather had died and his grandfather's dying.


Wish was it Duncan would bring little hobo on stage one last time before he buried him with with his grandpa. So you'd have the dummy on stage. Then the dummy was start talking to him. He's like, wait a minute. How the fuck are you talking? It was like this crazy thing where the dummy would take them over and they would play Pink Floyd he would sing along with there it is. It's just get a little hobo people. Did I took him with me to the UK? Okay, and they did not know what to fucking expect wish you were here. So he would play that song Pink Floyd song wish you were here and him and the dummy would be singing at the same time two different voices because he had like it synced up. He had like a whole set up with recordings and everything.


It was amazing. That's great living in a fishbowl year after year and his eyes would roll back in his head and the dummy would be singing it was amazing and people was amazing, but believe it. Oh, no, they would do they would love it was so good. It was so A good routine and then someone fucking stole a little hobo someone stole it until you had to get a new little hobo and the new little hobos even creepier isn't done it forever. I would love for him to do that routine. What would that be his closer? Yeah. Oh, yeah. You couldn't follow a little hobo. He is it in there. Give me give me some volume. We got a problem with our system. I just thought if I have to meet like five different one last chance on stage and dedicate a song to my grandfather's that okay with you guys.


If I do that that's not wish you were here. Oh, oh, oh, oh that was that was that was when someone was getting married that fucking Satanist with his name Stanton LaVey Anton LaVey that yeah. I took a photo with that guy and nuts online, Arkansas. Events that that's the evidence that I am a Satanist because the guy took it he was doing like the devil what I should and it was he was getting married and Duncan performed at his wedding and I had to go because was the craziest fucking shit ever Duncan was there and they hired him to do his little hobo routine at this guy's satanic wedding.


So just a good news. Wish you were here. He had to use their like, you know, we're more into this kind of like heavy metal since I got no. No, he did wish you were here. That was it. That was the program the because So yeah, it's hard to it's hard to take a Satanist. Seriously when he does this the devil horns. Yeah, you know, but he was a father did give that kind of stuff think he was the grandson or the son of a famous of Anton LaVey. I forget what it was grandson, but but it's are idea what Satanism is a little different like, you know, you think oh he worships the devil there Satanism was like Hedonism really what it was like because like giving in to your carnal instincts and desires Living For The Moment doing whatever you want to do, but I don't necessarily think now it's not like I say congrats times.


That's where the grandson said the son of the grandson whatever an apologist they were trying to explain to me and what so you believe in the devil you worship the devil like what is this? Well, they just had it's like, you know, the grandfather probably was a real deal. I think it was just there being silly. Yes. I think dealing versus Jakob Dylan Jakob Dylan's talented but as you know, Bob is it just it's a different different kind of talent. Yeah. Jacob's like pop he's got Great songs. Yeah, but he's not like Anton LaVey. What is that? Got where the fuck did Jakob Dylan go? I don't know. I met him back in the day when I was filming fear factors kids were like Fear Factor fans, right and they came to watch one of the episodes. I met Kenny G that way to you.


Did they came to the episode? Yeah, they came to watch out evil. The episodes are like outside. Yeah. Yeah, they came to watch. Yeah, they came to watch other people eat dicks stuff. Yeah, there's Thuggin. What is this the evolution of yeah, it's too little hobos. It was a wild night. Oh, okay. So he did some experimental work. I see that that was like that painter began his name, but it's like yeah, I see what he's doing. He had different phases of his. Yeah his career. Well, that's the problem when you have a closer like that then you just you just you can't really get inspired to keep working because you like them you just this close is going to change was weird to follow because I brought him with me on the road my God Jemaine come back up and do it at the end.


No, it was awesome. It was fun. It was fun. That's so funny. So Colin Quinn. What happens with you? Now? Where do you go when you go from here? That's the question is need to do stand up again. Where do we all go from him? Well, maybe I don't know like legitimately. I mean, where am I going? I don't know. I mean I write in I'm right if I write every day. I'm right. Scripture many books. I'm doing all that stuff right every day. Yeah, you sit down a specific time now to it or now, I don't have that discipline, you know, but I make sure I write you know, but I'm like, I'm sure like every time like, all right, like five days in a row and I'll be like I'm a beast. I'm really comment disciplined person and then the next day I'll just be like I just started eating and you know watching like any like any narcos or shoot show any show this related in any way to narcos is the greatest show.


To me on Netflix. Why do you like narcos? I just love all those shows. I love powder invoice that one. What's that? Like the Israeli one? No Powder. That's another Netflix. I only watch the first two seasons of narcos. Once it wasn't Pablo Escobar anymore. I kind of lost it was that guy not the well they do it in Mexico was great too. I heard nobody was as good as I got to play in Pablo Escobar is incredible because most evil like even what I expected to see Pablo Escobar was like this guy that's like raw and he's just playing this. Thing we have dull kind of banality of evil guy who's just like looking and then just oh boy. Was he an actor? I believed though me to its I mean in all in when he confronts those cops on the - on the bridge ice and another is like silver lead.


It's your choice and they're like, I'll take the silver shit the fuck. Yeah. That's a great. It's a it's just again like I add a huge photo Oh of Pablo Escobar in the old Studio huge of his mug shot was big smiling face. Yeah, and people would see it in the photos that take pictures with the guests in front of the werewolf with this Pablo Escobar photo and people get mad. They like you're celebrating this guy like he was terrible the Columbia like for me as an outsider who love that Narco shows like look at this chaos this fucking guy who I controlled Columbia for so many years made so much money selling Coke, but for the people that had to deal with it, it's the same as like the Romantic Notions of Times Square exactly.


It's like all n even me knows better that photo put God that huge mugshot. We have like a five foot version of that our podcast Studio. Well, that's funny because that shot and he probably loves that shot and probably hates that other shot was this fat as a house. When that that can't be here we go wife. Yeah, that's not him. That's him. All those pictures are cheese. That was he let himself Go full part was just doing coke and drinking and then what a party that guy LED until the end. I mean he He never really got the hair under control, you know, all that money. You should wear a hat. What kind of hat? Yeah, how about that in front of the White House? Ha ha ha while it's weird when you go by the White House how close it is to the street?


Yeah. I know. It's confusing. It's like Christ. Nobody fucking shot that place full of holes. Now. They probably been was probably in the back. Well, even if it was still just weird how close is because back then, you know, you had muskets it wasn't I'd like the bedroom upfront wouldn't you this way? You can look at and say hey people don't realize the president's looking at energy as you live. Wild. Human Edge right now. Yeah. Yeah. That's what in the back of the White House. That's why you're never going to be president. That's where we'll use the reasons. You might be able to be president, you know a lot about politics probably more than any comic. I know I've said Dave Smith. I feel like I feel like I would be a good person but that's that's the first step.


You have to be to loot narcissistic enough. That's why I'm saying that You're a good president. Yeah II think I could do this. I have two copies that narcissism book if you want. I like the idea better that we saved in The Green Room just to watch the fiery and then we film I mean Joe, I hope we can have some cameras in this thing. We filmed the anger in their faces when they say he's gave this book to me. I feel like you're honestly considering moving here. Yeah. Well, I do love I do love the idea of it. Do you really put like legitimately know all bullshit aside? You would move here. I don't know Ron White lives here. I don't know if I moved here to live. Runway sure, he's here II don't know. I don't know Ron White well enough where it would influence my mom.


I can introduce you to I mean, I know it's not get dry know, they'll kill us. We don't drag my feet. No, it's Broadway to Lifestyle and my lifestyle would not be you can just hang out while he drinks. I'll now I both of us. I'd rather know I'd rather do I'd rather watch you do it like like what a violent stuff, you know, like throwing Spears. I don't know what you're doing on the ranch but shit like that is more interesting to me. Okay, you know, I mean like all day. I'm sure you got like archery. I'm sure you'll do fun stuff to do my old Studio. I had an inside range at a 45-yard indoor range Ed. Oh, yeah. Yeah at a rubber elk. Let's shoot shoot arrows into you can get all kinds of stuff like that. Of course. Yeah a hundred percent. It's kind of cool.


Yeah. Yeah, the the next place where we have a studio 100% have a range Oh, I thought you meant in the house. I have it in my house too, right? Yeah, right. No, I have it at my house. But I mean the next dude. I'll have a range. I like to do it after shows. It clears my mind. It's good if you ever practice archery, yeah, once really I tried it fun. It's fun. Just something about hitting the targets agility some by letting it go. Yeah, it's like seeing that Arrow hit its Mark. Yes cleansing for the mind. I feel like that was I feel like the I feel like gut the invention of guns took a lot of the Purity out of War. You know what I mean, right? Yeah in the old days was all but even archers really think about it you fighting With sore you're used to a certain have and suddenly all these asshole arches at a thousands of yards back just you know release The Archers, you know, and we'll crazy shit was catapults, right?


Yeah. This is launch a ball covered flaming tar flying at you. That's how they took a Constantinople. I was watching this thing on that and I was like man those goddamn catapults. They didn't expect him, you know, hmm and they just yeah flaming for they just took it down they were like, what is this? So when I do open up a club out here I'm going to I'm going to send out the signal I'm gonna let you know, but honestly, I would love it. If you came by at least and worked, of course it would and I will test everybody now that we got the rapid testing we can get results in 15 minutes. I think we could do a whole crowd in an hour. I think if you I have that I go and tell people to get there at 7:00. Yes, 200 people you could do it inside an hour easy get a staff of nurses.


Everybody's Mast up until you get tested wouldn't be that hard to do. I mean, yeah everything. Even if you even have to buy then but I mean, I love the idea. Yeah, and people want to get there early plus it'll give people their early nothing worse than a bunch of latecomers exactly. Then when they come inside the they can have a drink once they pass. Yeah, you can take your fucking mask off and live like a person. Yeah, you're inside you have to worry everybody's been cleared. Everybody's been tested. I love it. I love it too. I love the fact that right. Now. I'm clear you're just laying around so I know it. I know it feels great. It does feel great today. I think was my what I say 37 test. I think today is my 37th test. Yeah.


Yeah, I think can be done. I just want them to come up with some sort of a treatment where we could just get back but I am gonna fucking appreciate things now. I mean, I do appreciate things but I'm really going to appreciate stand up again. When we add back to it. You're going to savor it. Yeah, right because sometimes it gets to the point where you like I want to do good is that that you don't enjoy it you can't help but enjoy it if you were a stand-up but you're not say you're like trying to get to the goal. I want to kill it. Is that the whole journey Like like sometimes I'll do it now and I'm like, I feel great afterwards. I wouldn't feel great during it to what if we lured you here by producing tough room producing and promoting tough room.


I don't know when you think about it. I'll think about it for sure. Thank you Billy. Well because if you did it as a podcast, I think it will be fucking giant. I really think it'd be giant. I think if we take the time and really think about it and organize really good guests like organized guys like Joey Diaz guys like Fitzsimmons funny fucking people have them come in they're going to do stand-up at the place. Yes, they'll do stay over the place and do it just like you did cut tough crowd. We have subjects in the news you bring it up and you have a table full of great Comics talking shit like a podcast. Yeah. I'll call about it for sure excited about how well I will all right, that's great. Listen, man. I'm glad you made it here bag was an honor.


It was a pleasure. It was really we do it again. Well do an absolutely okay. We'll do it again and when the club opens I want you to be there like one of the first weeks please wait, I would love it. All right. Yeah, I love it. All right. Do you have social media? You have all that jazz and Twitter, but I mean, my book is typing in from one of my books. Oh tell everybody about your book. My book is called overstated. Came out. It's a roast of the 50 states basically. So it's basically talking about the United States right now, and we've all been to I've been 47 I'm in the 50, maybe even the 57-47. I haven't I've been to Dakotas and Wyoming. I was just to say that I've been in the code AS Wyoming. Wow, that's exactly what I'm gonna say. I've been to Alaska and Hawaii there.


It is overstated Coast-to-Coast roast the 50 states. I haven't been to guess. I've been everywhere else. I kind of think. Nope. Never been in New Mexico either. Yeah, I think I drove through when I was a little kid, but that's it. I didn't think I've been anywhere. Yeah, I do shows in New Mexico and we went to the hotel as I quit like it here now Albuquerque. I'm lying there in the room. I'm like, it's just ice me Mitchell was like a drive-by next door and was a nice hotel Albuquerque's what's a wild west? That's Navajo country. Yeah tap tap. Tappy. I remember Johnny Tapia. Yes, I do. The fucking big was the the mother.


Virgin Mary, yeah, well his chest Loop. That's right Virgin of Guadalupe on this. Here's a great order bad motherfucker. Yeah. That was awesome. All right colleague when you're the best appreciate you brother. Thank you so much as soon as Austin comedy club opens up your in yes. Goodbye. Everybody. See ya. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you too for sick mattock, and they're delicious and nutritious lion's mane coffee and they're gonna hook you up. They're going to offer you a sweet deal on their best-selling lion's mane coffee. It's just for Jerry listeners receive up to 40% off on their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim this deal.


You must go to forcing Matic.com Rogan again this offer. Only for Jerry listeners, it's not available on the regular website. Go to fo you are SI G. M-- atic forcing Matic.com Rogan and get yourself some delicious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out. We're also brought to you by butcher box and they're fantastic grass-fed grass-finished beef free range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood. Which they will send directly to your door. It's an awesome company with fantastic ethics and values and they're gonna hook you up new members can get two lobster tails and to filet mignons for free when you sign up at butcher box.com Rogan.


That's butcher box.com Rogan to get to 5 ounce free lobster tails and to filet mignons in your first order. We're also brought To you by manscaped makers of the best ball hair trimmer the world has ever known the lawnmower 3.0. You can't get any better and the weed whacker their ultimate ear and nose hair trimmer. You can get 20% off and free shipping at manscape.com Rogan. That's 20% off with free shipping and manscaped.com Rogan. What are you waiting for?


Go? Whack your weeds. And of course, we are brought to you by whoop to Fitness tracker that I wear 24/7. I will be wearing it all through sober October because I wear it all year round. It's awesome. I love it. It builds healthier. Smarter habits. Whoop is a no-brainer and listeners this podcast and get 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout. Go to whoop. That's wh oop.com enter the code word Rogan at checkout to save 15% get to know yourself on a deeper level. Unlock yourself with blue. Thank you friends for tuning into the show much. Love to you all five bucks and