
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by Roca I where you can check them out at our okay a.com. You probably already heard me talk about Roka sunglasses. They are fucking amazing. I love them. I wear them every time I wear sunglasses but there's probably something you maybe didn't know Roca also makes the only prescription eyeglasses on the planet that are actually made from scratch to do badass shit. I'm telling you if you wear glasses. These are the only things you want on your face from now. On they took all the insane texts that they develop with the best athletes and badasses in the world and engineered it into incredible-looking prescription eyeglasses.


They're lighter than anything else out there like forget you're wearing them light. So they're more comfortable and they don't give you a headache at the end of the day. The Optics are As Good As It Gets just crystal clear no glare super durable materials. They can add blue light blocking Coatings if you like they have titanium bendable Temple. Al's so you can dial it in exactly how it wraps around your ears. So it fits your head perfectly different sizes of their gecko nose pads. So if you have a fat nose or a skinny nose, you can get a perfect fit with all this means is that they're super fucking comfortable and you can actually do shit in them because they don't slip at all and it could be just leaning over to pick up your kids or Jim stop or you could be using them for kettlebells yoga Sprint's whatever you're into you don't have to compromise or switch into Tax just because you actually move your body sometimes so if you need glasses or even if you want some blue blocking frames or readers, like like I wear sometimes when I want to reach it because I'm going blind.


You need to check them out right now. They got a bunch of classic great-looking Styles and it's super easy. They'll send you the glasses at home so you can try them and see what looks good. And then you just send them your prescription and boom you're done super easy and JRE listeners will get 20% off with the code Rogan. So go to Roca Dot-com that's our okay a.com and check them out enter the code Rogan for 20% off check them out. These guys are right here in Austin and there I where is the shit and we're also brought to you by whoop to Fitness tracker that I wear 24/7 7 days a week. I fucking love it.


It gives you so much information. It lets me know how well I slept is got a sleep coats that will tell you how much you need to sleep the make sure that you're fully Rested and recovered a ready to tackle a day. It's got a strain coach that lets you know, how much you actually have strained during your workouts and what your body can handle it lets. You know, how strenuous your day is. I wear this thing 24/7 it monitors your heart rate and heart rate variability and it measures your resting heart rate and it gives you all this insight and the inside is next level. Like I said, it is the best fitness tracker I've ever used and it can tell you how behaviors like drinking alcohol or Taking CBD or drinking coffee or certain diets can impact your sleeve your recovery and more in a way that's personalized to use.


You can understand how to better optimize your behaviors So for anybody looking to build healthier smarter habits, I can personally tell you whoop is a no-brainer. I fucking love it and for listeners of this podcast. Whoop is going to hook you up with 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout go to whoop as wh oop.com into the code row. In at checkout to save 15% get to know yourself on a deeper level unlock yourself with whoop. We're also brought to you by expressvpn expressvpn is the best VPN that I've ever used. It's awesome for protecting your privacy. But it also does something else it unblocks content expressvpn lets you change your online location.


So you can control where you want sites to think that you're located. It's really easy to do you open the app? Select a location tap one button to connect and then refresh the page to access thousands of new shows and movies. You can choose from almost a hundred different countries. Like you can watch Doctor Who from the UK Netflix. You can watch anime on Japanese Netflix. You can watch Star Trek discovery on you UK Netflix. You can watch Rick and Morty on France Netflix. I mean this works with any streaming service you works with Hulu BBC iPlayer YouTube you can stream in HD with no problem with expressvpn.


There's no buffering. There's no lag. It's awesome. It's compatible with all your devices phones laptops media consoles Smart TVs and more and not only does it let you change your location. It also encrypts your data and lets you surf the web safely and anonymously go to expressvpn.com Rogan to get an In three months of expressvpn for free that's expressvpn.com Rogan. We're also brought to you by Harry's. Oh Harry Harry's just came out with the sharpest blades ever and unlike some other razor companies.


They're not charging you more for their product improvements. Harry's new sharper blades are still as low as two bucks each. Is a fucking awesome company that does razors perfectly. They got to dial down to a science. You can find Harry's new sharper blades and big box drug and grocery stores near you or if you like to shop online new US customers can redeem a trial offer of Harry's new sharper Blades by going to harrys.com / Rogan these new blades are so sharp that in the study where guys are shaving four times a week. They Did that with Harry's new blades their eighth shaves as smooth as their first Harry's actually owns a German Factory that's been honing razor blades for a hundred years.


They Source their steel from Sweden and they own the entire manufacturing process from research and development to the factory floor. And this allows them to keep the quality High and the price is low and they stand confidently by it with a hundred percent quality guarantee at harrys.com. Um, Harry's is available wherever you shop and you get Harry's sharpest blades ever at Big Box drug and grocery stores near you just head over to the grooming aisle. And if you like to shop online new US customers can redeem a Harry's trial set at harrys.com Rogan you get a five blade razor featuring their new sharper blades awaited handle foaming shave gel with a low and a travel cover to protect your Laid when you're on the go, so go to harrys.com / Rogan and redeem your trial offer today.


All right friends. My guest today is a great friend. One of the best comedians. I know a hilarious and original person and one of my favorite guest on the podcast. Please give it up for the Great and Powerful Tim Dylan The Joe Rogan Experience trained by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. I'm here with the covid kid covid kid basically a free country who covid free. Antibodies in negative. Are you worried? You're traveling on them risky circumstances? Yeah. Well a lot of these clubs that you work are they're pretty full and pretty fault.


I've been looking at those lines outside the club. I'm like, yeah, how big is this place where you going to socially distance all these people it doesn't seem it doesn't seem that socially distance, but how tall I don't know but we also don't know nobody. You know, I is it Airborne? Can you get it? Yes, it is air blow hundred percent. Well, that's not great. No, you definitely can get it from the air. Yeah, but but here's the thing man. It's this is so politicized. It's been so politicized. If you look at the numbers of deaths the numbers of deaths are way down there talking about the numbers of like cases or outright, but the deaths are way down. Yeah, they're much better at treating it. Yeah way better but also it's like people are better at taking care of themselves. They're going to go out and do things to the understand you got to take most people are aware of vitamin D.


Now. I take it every day. Yeah thousand I use. Yeah you go. A lot of you were where's think a lot of people wear a vitamin C and Our people are also that are high-risk. They're not going. Yeah. I'm not only look at people in the clubs. Like I'll look at some members of my audience. I'm like, you shouldn't be here you're taking you're taking way too big of a risk for a few. Haha. Yeah, but I'm happy about the ticket and thanks for coming but I'm like just looking at them going I wouldn't be in that chair if I were you what got to make your own eyes. So maybe after I would I think if I was locked up for six months and I couldn't go out and then one of my favorite Comics was in town. Down I'm like fuck. Let's go out. Let's go out. Let's go do it we get tickets like you coming.


Yeah, we gotta be it obviously want to avoid getting at but there's a level of fatalism where you have to say. Listen, you know, there's no guarantee. You could walk out of your house and encounter any number of things that could kill you. Well, Florida to said fuck it. They just fuck it. We're opening up for everything today everything concerts everything you could do like a Rena's they would have been closed down for that law. Not that close out for a few weeks long enough. Yeah, there was like that's enough. Everyone's sobered up. That was just a hangover. Everybody got sober and Florida they sobered up and let's get Back at It Disney World has been open forever busy land and Allah is still closed are about to go bankrupt. Yeah Disney World the like come on in where I'm at.


I don't give a fuck. Yeah, who cares? Okay. Yeah, just come in. Be careful. Get eaten by an alligator. Yeah, you might get eaten by an alligator or you might get a cough right or you might get a cold. Yeah, it seems like we're trending in the direction of Of things opening up listen gotta give people Freedom this the government was never supposed to have the ability to tell you what you can and can't do in terms of like what's risky the argument against that is that you're putting other people in danger what this point in time. We're six months into this fucking thing. You got to pull the Band-Aid off you got to do something. You can't you can't just allow people to go bankrupt.


I never never be able to work. Let's also like Thomas Shoal the Mercedes like there are no Shield one of my favorite quotes because there's no Solutions. There's only trade-offs. So your it's a trade-off, right? So if you tell everyone yes, you might keep some people healthy, but at what level of damage to the economy to people's livelihoods suicide is up child abuse his job. There's all kinds of problems that come from a lockdown. Yeah. It's way up suicides way up. That's crazy. Yeah suicide child abuse and that shocked me the child abuse was out because I was like who I've Loved child abuse was like a fixed thing meaning if you hate your kids you just hit your kids know I think people react to like heavy stress, right? I mean Riley people are just broken don't know what to do and their kids won't shut the fuck up and they just got us man.


Yeah. It's terrible very sad. It's the saddest fucking time ever because people are losing their jobs and they're losing their livelihoods and they didn't do anything wrong. Right and the only time I know nobody's addressing that right like nobody's addressing that and then there's a lot of people, you know, you know celebrities and people that have a lot of money that are shaming people. Want to go back to work? Yeah, and they're saying that these people just want to go out and party and have fun. It's like no they need to earn money. Yeah. Well that's shaming people that want to do shows I've seen right? Yeah, it's crazy. They're fools. They're people with money and you listen people listen people can do almost anything that puts them at risk and freely right? You can BMX bug bike you can fucking bungee jump you could go.


Yeah sale eat anything you want. Yeah. You can sail the ocean you can fuck. And you could vote hand Glide you could do all these different things that are like super dangerous. You could eat anything you want you go get drunk all the time kill your liver, right the idea that this shouldn't be something that you should be able to try or do because you're going to put other people at risk boy that that gets real sketchy that gets real sketchy because the people that are at risk they know their risk, it's not like you're sneaking up on them. It's one thing if you have a kid, this is where it gets dangerous if you have like a 21 year old kid parties all the time and then you're like 60 right and your kid comes home and he gives it to you and you die right that that's real.


Yeah, that's real you live with your fucking parents or you live with your grandparents. Yeah, don't do anything high-risk you fucking asshole. Yeah, but if you're like a regular person person who just lives by themselves a lives with some friends and you want to be able to go out and you're willing to take the risk. You should be able you should be able yeah people need to make money. Well the government's not supposed to be able to have that kind of power over you right and once they have it it's very difficult for them to let it Go what we sought after 9/11 right after 9/11 the government took a lot of powers supposedly for a very good virtuous reasons of keeping America safe for protecting everybody and they a lot of those Powers they never let him go. We're gonna go right into conspiracy. Never gave them back. No, I just haven't read it. I just thought it was a nice segue. You have your cutie sure.


I just thought it was a nice segue. That's all I just so we can bring them down 11 really quick. Just we could go and just a nice route to get you know, a hundred military bases by means true. They have a lot of power and they don't give it back. None of the powers. They That they don't give them back. They don't go. Oh the disease is over now. We're going to let you know contact tracing it. Sounds great, right? He's somebody oh, it doesn't even sound right but the idea of it is like if you are in contact with people they trace who you were in contact with because of covid. Yeah, they're going to do that for other reasons and you're not gonna like it. They're going to use that technology to trace peoples that are considered antisocial personality disorder or whatever it is. They don't like what you post it on Facebook. They don't like I mean that's coming or how about what if you get injured with you hurt your back and they know that they put you on On pills, right?


And then they say hey, right you drive and Tim what's going on driving right your backs hurt right here on the pills. Are you driving on pills? Yeah, or whatever the fuck it is if there's someone look Snowden talked about how people could just read your e-mails. Right? Right. Well, who's what's to stop someone from tracing you like say you have some political disagreement with some guy who's an obvious, but you also cheat on your wife, right? And they go look Tim's going over to his fucking lady's house. Yeah slipping out the old fucking shot. All right, whenever I can if it's a huge problem, it's a problem that nobody like we've all resigned ourselves to the fact that it's happening and we just go right did you shrug? Well, we're busy.


Yeah, that's how we feel about a lot of things. So there's too much to think about like that's how it is with the NSA, you know, the mass surveillance. I mean people just sort of go where we're going to do. What are you gonna do? Yeah, people are like, you know my favorite and I've said it to it's like to like if you want us to film me doing nothing, you know, that's Everybody's like yeah. Hey surveil. May I get it? I've said I made jokes like that, but it's I think it's when you look at Tack and how much power the tech has acquired over the last five years. For example. Have you watched The Social dilemma? I did holy fuck I did. Yeah. I mean, I thought a lot of that was pretty well known before it writes. Well known to you. Okay, but I think for people who don't like really pay attention to it.


See here's the difference between you and I and the regular folks right people have You'll job say if you work right Microsoft your fucking job all day is thinking about in Microsoft, right? You have real important shit. You have bottom lines. You have to bump up yet. You have goals to me. Yeah meetings you have to ride together, right? They have things to think of did you can't we're just fucking off all day. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, that is a good point. We don't we don't well and part of our job is to kind of fuck off. Yes, right part of our job is to figure out what's funny out there, right and you can't do that by really focusing. Focusing on one thing you have to just go all over the place, right? But I think the social dilemma when I watch it.


I was like, yeah, it's the thing with social media is it's not designed to work. Well like it's designed to work how it's working. Right? I mean that was maybe the biggest thing about social dilemmas. Like this is designed to work this way yours you should be fighting the negativity spreads very quickly. People are gonna go with each other's throats. You're fighting with family and I fight I look it. I watch family members fight each other that don't even talk in real life like they Even know each other existed but they find each other and fight and they would never see each other. They would maybe do it once at a reunions every three years, but what's the answer is the answer to just log off that seems to be the only answer logging off some of the worst idea right?


I think you know, I was in the woods recently. I was in Utah hunting and no service for three days and it was great. Do you feel a high better? Say like you feel a high the day like a day of no phone they say you feel like you get up the next day. You noticing like birds you notice things you feel better. Yeah, if you can't check your phone all the time because it doesn't work. Yeah, you don't check your phone. Yeah, we're going to look at your pictures over and over again. You're not right you want interaction? That's what I want to check like Saddam and dopamine. Hey, yeah. Yeah, I don't read comments and I don't check likes and I don't check. I have a very strict policy and it's made me very happy. But even that even that yeah, I watch I look at other people shit, right?


So I would go to look at your page are laugh at your stuff. Okay, and I go read your Thomas right. This guy's a piece of shit and I was reading that assholes but bean and yeah, even though it's not about me it has nothing to do with me. I will ya still occasionally run into things that bothered me ever run into behavior that annoys me and I'm like, why am I focusing on some person? That doesn't even have a real name? Yeah, their name is like, you know fucking a pilot. Yeah, why stop the comments when one of them was said that we think Whitney Cummings is Tim Bill and CIA Handler. I said, I'm gonna try check out now like this is yeah. They were like, he's not talking about Obama gate on his show. It's because Whitney Cummings talking about saw like when you coming I love her to death.


I don't think she knows what Obama gate is and I have mentioned it a few times it was like, but it was just so funny. I started laughing but I'm like I could this people's mental illness The Cure just yeah living in people's very dysfunctional Minds. Well, I guess people I know that I know not good friends, but I know pretty casually yeah that will tell me that they think the CIA talks to me about Who I can have on the show right now because I've had Mike Baker on right who used to write in the CIA still in most likely he's today even joked with him. Yeah, but my interaction with him is about what we talked about on the podcast, right and then afterwards we talked about like fishing. Yeah, right, right. That's our company whatever room at threatened years right does none of that if they did have a podcasting division, right?


Like they're not like who's on Marin this week. That's not what they're they're not booking podcast. I bet they do now. That's interesting. They might I bet they do now that was better than I did before we came around but now they might I would imagine they have their damn they're big and movies. They're big and movies that's huge like movies especially movies that are made about you know, Zero Dark Thirty things like that about torture Kathryn Bigelow like they try to justify their policies through popular culture all the time. Oh, yeah, it's propaganda. Yeah, but I just think it's hilarious the idea that they have to now check who's on a podcast. Yeah. I don't know if it's the CIA. I mean, I don't know who's doing that but it's somehow point in government. Certainly has relationships with Hollywood. And also like the people in Hollywood.


If the CIA calls you up and you're doing a movie like Zero Dark Thirty, right? And they go we'd like to talk to you about this like fuck. Yeah, we're going to talk to ya when I talked to the seals we're going to tie the NSA. Yeah want to know. Yeah you want to know but then they can also feed you whatever information they want for sure. There's that for sure that's happened for sure. There's been propaganda that's been spilled through Hollywood. There's no doubt about it. I just think they missed the boat on this podcast thing. They didn't know it was coming. They should have gotten Involved they should have gotten him out. They had if he needs have a few undercover CIA agents doing a podcast Brooklyn apartment, you know wouldn't be good at making millions not been after all mental illness. You have to be little sick. Yeah. I knew when I think of how many how many hours I've talked to are how many hours you've talked for.


There's something wrong something wrong something very wrong. Sure. Yeah, then people need to realize that like if you take my opinion seriously, like listen to me. I don't even take my opinion. Seriously. Why are you listening to me for right half the time? I'm just thinking out loud, right? I don't like Literally, maybe 40% of the things that I say on this podcast. I don't know what I'm saying what I'm saying it right? I'm just thinking out loud, right and that's the whole art form of doing this because you can't you have to explore every possibility. Yeah, and sometimes I have a thought that's very well thought out some times where it's like no I've thought about this for a while and this is why I believe this. Yeah, and there's a difference like you'll hear me right? You hear things that I say that I like really Cleo.


I know what I'm saying know what I'm talking then you hear like Ram. Saying nonsense tonight and you gotta that's just how it goes. If you have to think out loud, you're going to have both of those things. Why do you think people get so angry at the idea of that? Like people get very angry at the idea of like being just being open to the idea of being wrong, like people get angry and they're like every word out of your mouth has to be absolutely the what you want it to be and it's weird to me because we're going to gotcha soundbite culture, right? So the one of the ways they'll digest your show or my show is someone will put a clip up look with this piece of shit, Tim Dylan set and Else have something that you said completely out of context in a two-and-a-half-hour rant right way just like talking nonsense about JFK still being alive or whatever it is.


Yeah. I mean I and I and my live show every every every shot but doing right now by saying thanks for having me everybody Ruth Bader Ginsburg is burning in hell. That's and it's that's fun. Because to me I'm like, you know, all I've seen is praised lavished upon her and deservedly so right but the funny angle to me is that she's actually burning in hell and good night. And that's what but if you take that and you know, you don't understand that that's a funny thing to say. Yes, and that there is no he'll probably and I don't know who's there, but that's the funny angle to say of course. Yeah, that's you know, one of the things Louis CK said when he was Talking about comedy material and you know getting in trouble for material.


He's like comedy is often saying things that you're not supposed to say, right? Like that's why you say because everyone knows you're not supposed to say it at and then you go and say in like, oh my God, and that's what's funny. Yes the idea that you're holding people to those thoughts as if this is like an affidavit, right and they've signed this I worked it out with lawyers and this is my position. Yeah, and this is this is where I stand know you're literally talking off the cuff. Saying something Preposterous like Ruth Bader Ginsburg is burning in hell. Right, right and you're doing that just so everybody else goes by it gets a big everybody because it's crazy. It's entertaining. It's crazy and maybe true well, but what is crazy about it is that it's you know, it's the unexpected.


It's the it's the crazy just out there. Say the most insane thing you can well the thing about it today though is everyone is looking to catch people saying things you shouldn't say And getting mad at you and then they want to silence you right they want to stop you from saying the things that you what happened to carry out, you know to me it's like a lot of this is the death of curiosity, right because I grew up and I listen to all these different radio shows that would listen am talk radio guys like Bob grant and Rush Limbaugh. Oh, yeah. Remember yeah Bob Graham. He's got get off my phone you fake phony fraud. You would just hang up on people who would fight with people guys would calm has always like the same guy who's like Bob, this is Tony from Seaside Heights and I would go and you go, you know, I I think you're you know, the clintons.


I think it'd be a little lighter and babka. Will you shut up and they would just fight all day and I didn't know if the guy was right or if he was wrong. I just knew what was happening was hilarious. Yeah and interesting and I was curious about what other people in the world. I was a young kid being driven around by my parents, but I'm like I was curious about what other people in the world thought what they were saying because when you listen those talk radio shows you're in a car you're driving around and you hear some psychopath on that's the calling by great like they used to say that about Grant be like, you know, you really disappointed me about Grant would go. Do you know me you have any knowledge of who I am like I disappointed you and then you would try to look at the cars, but I wonder what psychopath went home and called the guy, you know, so I was just curious now.


It seems like there's this death of curiosity where no one is curious about what anyone else is thinking unless it happens to be what they're thinking it has to coincide exactly with how you view the world. And so it's it's part of it is social media and Part of it is Trump right Trump has he his brand of being president the his way of doing it as polarize people while so hard that they will do anything and everything they can to keep him from being president again, right being president second term and they're forcing compliance. Yeah, you have to comply with our view of what's going on in the world. And I think I find it fascinating just going through my Instagram feed and looking at people or Trump supporters.


Trump haters and looking at their perspectives, right and looking at this this off fucking giant Grand Canyon like divide and my favorite thing is vote. Tell everyone to vote. That's what everyone does now tell her I did a whole podcast episode this week ago. I'm not telling you to votes not my job voter don't vote. It's like I don't tell you to eat your vegetables. All right, I don't tell you to jog, right? I'll tell you to do anything. I tell you have to meditate. Hey, raise your kids who spend time with your kids you spending time with your son. He's in college you that you and him don't talk like what? In God's name like you walk into a nightclub to see me. I say with product is burning it out. Then I turn around everyone make sure to have a voting plan. Well what's happened is there's a lot of these fucking idiots that aren't getting any attention and we found out why they're in Show Business.


They're not just in Show Business to create. They're not just in Show Business to hone their craft and to be good as an actor or be good as a comic they want attention, right and when there's no attention to be had on stage. They seek it out on Twitter and they seek It Out by being Correct about yeah, some people are using Twitter and it just hilarious right and saying ridiculous shit. Very funny. Same thing with Instagram like Lil Duval is my favorite game today never gets political now, it gets serious, right? Everything's just having a good time. Yeah, occasionally talking about pussy. Right? Right mostly what he does. Yeah, but some people they lack that self-awareness and all they want is likes, right so they try to figure out what can I say to get people thinking that I'm really Progressive and really open minded and you know, I'm What can I say?


Yeah, they're really like hits the tone and gets a lot of Juicy likes. Yeah, I'd like to hit about 2,000 like rabbits. It's so weird because to me social media so fun because like the people that are really the best at it AR-15. They're the winners like to take that kids are the winners. The d'amelio girls have like 80 minute like you were making money. They're making real money like millions of dollars and more than Paris. Yeah, my dog and 12 year old officer on the house all day. She's yeah. So what are we all even trying it like your take is not half. Of them going like this, right? So what are we doing? Like your numbers are not like those so I look at it. It's like it's a joke, like social media should be a joke because it is a joke because the people that are really monetizing it like a lot of those people their 16-year olds and they're dancing around and it's like and it's unserious if you but if you look at things the accumulation of time during the day, right if you look at people's phones, I'd love to grab Alyssa.


Milano's phone go eight hours. Right eight hours. You're on your phone eight hours. How many of these people are interacting with other human beings? Things for eight hours a day. Not not yeah not very few very few and certainly not having meaningful conversations and long what they're doing is they're seeking approval through others online in this very fake like Halo shallow way and that's what Twitter is it's arguing with people and it but some people use it. Well, there's journalists that use it. Well, there's people that like find interesting things to discuss and they some people pull it off but it's not many. Yeah. I'm wondering if the answer is just abstinence. I don't think people can handle this right so I found out yeah, I think that you might have to just disconnect that.


I wonder if subsequent Generations will like they'll just yeah, we saw what happened in 2020 and this stuff almost led to a Civil War and craziness. We don't want any part of it too many people like it too many people like it for everybody to jump off but I think enough people can understand because of documentaries like the social dilemma and conversations that they have with each other about it where they're going to they're going to check out and you know, there's what is that the Light phone is that what it's called? The one that's like it's a black-and-white phone. All you could do is text and make phone calls off of it. It's like a small little so it doesn't give you the like the vivid imagery of an iPhone can't watch YouTube videos on I call 911. If you want to text me you can text me. If you want to call me. You can call me and that's all it does and no no data.


So what is called The Light phone? Yeah. Look at this thing. See this is for people that realize they're junkies and then like I'm a junkie. What is a little embarrassing though that you guys can't control myself. If I need a light it is and it isn't though because there's something to be said for this there's something really good to be said for this. Yeah. It's a phone and alarm. Oh, you can play music on it. You can get a taxi taxi. What do you live? You know Susan bangladeshis light phones going to sneak in a messaging feature like light phones gonna start to creep in no. No, I'm amazed. It has music on it though. I'm shocked by that the Light phone can call text or set alarms out of the box. What's up? Amy right there some parents.


Buy this for the kid like you can have a phone but all you can have is a light phone and then kids will hack it. You know, it's coming like a should be it. By the way, they should have like a fight phone were the only one thing on his Twitter. It has call. Anyway, you can't tax cuts have I fight phone it's just Twitter and Facebook and you can't call 911 if you get hit by a car optional Tech available includes calculator a simple music player and a podcast to while you fucked up their big broadcast big problem. Here's an animation of some of the Our faces are Future tools that are still in development. Not all these tools are yet available, you know, I know friends who have taken Twitter and Instagram and like Sam Harris deleted Instagram office phone a long time.


We told me he goes on infinitely happier without it on my phone because he would get in arguments with people on Instagram. Excuse me color Twitter on Twitter and I would text him and be like, what the fuck are you doing man? You're a neuroscientist your pregnant wife right with people I want with these idiots, but it's like You get wrapped up and people like saying disparaging things about you. Yeah, you're being defamed and you're like I should I just read it. You have to read it. Keep moving. You're big you're big with that like you don't get into The Fray when people say nonsense. I'm not you there's too many people saying nonsense about right where I had to spend my whole day doing right because that would it would take hours and hours. Yeah, and that's how you wind up not being productive.


You can be successful. You want to get things done you can argue with people about who you are right? You won't you do you know who you are. No, you are you can argue with people about who you are, right, you know makes sense if people want to bring up mistakes, you've made 10 years ago or five years ago like okay great. Good luck with that. Try to diminish me in the face. Yeah. It's a silly way to treat people right? I wouldn't do it to other people. I don't want them to do it to me, but I don't want to argue with you either if you want to talk in person and people want to talk in person. That's how people work things out and most of the time you do that you wind up hugging or laughing fine. Most people are cool. Yeah. It's a shit way to communicate. It's bad. I know people see people that are fighting on Facebook and I'm like, I know you have each other's numbers, right and and also fuck the number if you saw each other in person, I guarantee you just talk right nine times out of ten, right?


You would just talk right would just be like, well, I think he's this and that well, maybe I mean, I don't know like you'd work it out right? It's not that wall that's between you on social media. It's also like when someone's writing something and you can't you're not there in front of them, they just writing it and then you have to read it and then you right Think back. It's like it's we have an amazing way to communicate and involves looking at each other and involves being near each other and involves registering when you say something mean and the / it bothers the person right like all that stuff out the window when you just texting or when you're tweeting tweeting is even worse right? Because in the whole world seeing and you know, someone saying something mean about you and other people are reading it right this must be real other people can read it.


Yeah. It's it's a terrible way to communicate it's the Worst it's probably the worst way in history. We've ever had to have a productive conversation and there are so many people that are mentally ill because of it. Yeah, mentally ill you do you think it exacerbated some hundred per? Yeah hundred percent. Yeah, and a lot of them of these fucking actors and actresses. Yeah that are just did not getting any attention. It's narcissism run wild and there's no puncturing it with any type of objective reality or fax to live there creating your own world to live in this. Get worse though. I think it kind of gets worse. I think it heads to a kind of dystopian place where everybody lives in their own reality. We're seeing that right now and it just seems to be inevitable to a degree.


The real fear is that it's going to get more immersive. They'll write the real fear is that the solution will be even worse than this and it's going to be like in your head. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah some neural link type shit that the next level of this interaction. The next level of technology is going to be way more immersive. That's what I'm worried about. I'm But I'm worried it's not gonna be something you escaped from like you're going to skate like you just leave your phone there, you know this if that phone goes into your body exactly. You're not Escape. Now. You just hit the switch Tim just hit the switch. Don't turn it on when you pee and you don't check your messages while you're peeing. Let's let me see how people feel about but click everyone's back hates me.


I gotta be honest with you. It sounds so convenient the chip already because I lose my phone a lot. So I'm like already like I could just get Chip and then just kind of click it on and I will just chip. Yeah worried about you're a strong man. You can put it where it sticks and stones can hurt your bones. I know maybe we should all embrace it. Maybe we should just go that route. Like maybe there is no fight anymore. Maybe we should just him but maybe we're not spending enough time on Twitter right just be a cunt 24 hours a day. Just lay in a spot and tweet go to war just go to war just fire off tweets all day everyday fight with people. You don't know just just quote people. Go bad take nope. I love that. You just quote from golf.


Nope, fuck off bad take you'd better be better. If I may be better just keep going this all the passive aggressive shit that you could say. Yeah. Well you almost wonder is it just you just jump in hard and then you have like Facebook, which is the to me the funniest one because it is truly a great. It's a graveyard. It's elderly people screaming out into the void into nothing is right. It's Purgatory. Yeah. Got hair graft post-ops. It's Purgatory for people that are like on their deathbed there in the latter years of their life their dog just died. He got a picture of their dead dog on Facebook. They're saying Max took his last nap and then the writing three paragraphs about Kamala Harris.


It's like this and then other people are fighting with the and it's really sick, but I like it. I enjoyed I do a thread some time instead of a Netflix movie. Sometimes I'll just do a 300 comment thread Angela just yeah just read it. I'll just read it. I'll just I'll just go wow thing. You know, some people are surprisingly smart. Some people are so out there some people that used to sell me cocaine are now big into Family Values. So I love that. Yeah lot of my ex Coke dealers are now Q people. So when I like save the children, I'm like you didn't raise your children. You sold me cocaine. I was a child. I was doing it when I was in my teens and now you're like we need to Save the children in the tunnels.


I'm like what so it's fun to track the progression of people through those sites. Yeah, there's enough real child trafficking where those people get like positive reinforcement. There is of course like we're talking about recently Jamie those 35 people that were saved in, Georgia. Yeah, that's real long as they are. They're also right. Yeah, that's the thing about that's two people as long as they are there also write in certain instances. There's human trafficking is a massive problem real Pro have been massive cover-ups with our government and many other governments, you know there right now of one right now today, there's more slavery today than when we had slavery in the United States 25 missing endangered kids rescued in Ohio over two weeks US Marshals located dozens of missing children between the ages of 13 and 18 in a mission called Operation Safety Net the children found Cleveland East Cleveland, Akron Mansfield.


What does that useful Euclid Euclid Willoughby and even Miami, Florida. Wow, sorry this in operation the two trafficking operations. It's real. Yeah, that's that is real and it's particularly real when you know, you can get kids that are orphans fall through the cracks foster kids. Yeah and the government I mean, this is what nobody really wants to admit that the United States. Permanent at at all levels has in many ways like been either a kind of I wouldn't I won't say a sponsor of this on the whole but there's elements of the CIA that have allowed things like this to happen. In order to get information on people. This is set. This is what was the idea about the Epstein's absolutely it was that say let him do that rather would have something over these people and that is sick Beyond human comprehension and most people don't A really admit that's happening.


Right? And when I think like a lot of the Q people found that stuff out then their brains melted and they were like, oh, but did David space heating kids. It's like that's not it that's not where it goes. What it is is that you have a lot of people that are, you know getting educated on overnight. Yeah and their minds cannot handle the amount of information much of it very disturbing. Remember last week when you asked that like that was the first time that that happened the like AB student style story and I mentioned that which substance else was like that that I think you said something like this has never happened before like Senator. Oh, that's right. And then you found that other story. He's the one I learned about it from uh-huh.


Yeah. Well no this happen before it happened in Omaha. Nebraska is called the Franklin Scandal a lot of people know about it. I didn't Nick Bryant wrote a book about it and there was an interstate pedophile Network that was trafficking kids to wealthy and powerful people many of them in the government. I mean, there's a Is money here but this was one not separate from North Fox Island because North Fox Island also, I mean, there's many many, you know, it's a lot of yeah, there's many many ideas guys on the podcast it blew my mind. I had no and I was a conspiracy guy and I had no idea that this was going on but a lot of it is blackmail. Yeah, and a lot of it is people allowing the worst things imaginable to happen to children in order to gain leverage on other people. That's what was happening with Epstein. That's what was happening with with Franklin, but it's also people that have that hunger they will have poor appetite.


Was that shit? Of course, they're sick sadistic pedophiles and then some group of people call it an intelligence agency or whoever whoever wants leverage. Whoever wants power is using this as a means to obtain it. No, so even though the Q people are set. All right, because they're saying like, well everyone in Hollywood's been executed and other clones. I mean, it's like it's kind of a funny. It's kind of funny a little bit, you know, they're really, you know, JFK jr. Is alive there's some real wild stuff but the core premise which is that human trafficking is a horrible Insidious thing. That it connected to many high-powered people isn't necessarily wrong. Right? No, it's not it's not wrong and there's a lot of evidence throughout history.


That's why you know, that pizza gate shit turned out to be nonsense, but but they're creepy and that art is creepy the it's not just that the artist creepy. Ah, it's that the the human mind Breitbart wrote a tweet about John tadasana, and he said a something to the degree of when will it come out? Out to John podesta is like protecting, you know sexual predators or something like that. I forget to tweet Jamie could find it but it was a long the lines of that. It was almost like that. He was helping them write enabling rack enabling. Yes, and I feel yeah. I mean there have been people like that in high levels of government and in leadership how Prague grew John podesta isn't household name as world-class underage sex slave op cover.


Upper defending unspeakable drags Escapes Me Now 2011 February 4th died shortly after that. Yeah. He didn't die long after that. Not long but he also was unhealthy and because he was kind of crazy to write. I don't know much about him, but I'm sure he was a little wild I mean to get into that business you have to be right I would imagine I mean he was a guy that did a lot of stunts he was very like, you know, he was at one of the incendiary like he, you know made a name for himself and made a name for his company. That's the problem with those guys. Yeah, like whenever someone goes way out of their way to do stunts and to do things. It's like huh? Yeah, and then something else if you're involved in something and then it's legitimate now, I have to go right but is it that the guy what the fuck is his name?


That guy that's always doing the undercover shit James. Yeah, James O'Keefe. He's got a new one now about ilium Omar islets in the cab the ballast and the card. He's got these I say look at all these ballots look at all these ballots, but you got to go with that guy. You got to go. Okay, but didn't eat breakfast didn't eat. There was some shit with Roy Moore where they were trying to get girls to say that he'd knock knock them up. And there was like a lot of likes anybody shit like anybody that you know, he's coming to this with an agenda right? But then he also catches shit. That's real. Yes, like he caught those people on Twitter the Twitter executive talking about how the shadow band Pete. Yes talking about how they banned. Natives or how they block conservatives, right?


That's all real, right. That's all really I've been mostly so it's like whenever someone can't be straight with you and they have little tricks and they have stunts right over that you let you go the argument that those guys make is that to get any attention in the climate that we're in it's almost impossible to do it with like a sober reasoned rational approach you have to because it's the circus you're competing with. They're competing with anybody. They're competing for oxygen with some of the most the most entertaining president in history by far by far, right? So anything you do now has to be on that level of spectacle to get any type of attention you look at the intellectuals that were whether they were left-wing or right-wing from 30 or 40 years ago.


They're appalled at the people now. Yeah, we're carrying their message, but the people now who are carrying their message or like we're existing in the climate that we're in now, what is the General consensus like how is the media treating is ilhan? Oh Martha. Am I saying her name? Right. Illya Ivanov it. I mean look at me. Do you think I know how to pronounce know better than me? Ilhan Omar's meant when I look today because I saw yesterday the initial response. I saw was probably more from like liberal sides for being like this is just too fog the conversation because of all the tax stuff that just came out. Mmm and that like take this with a grain of salt because of his history. Yeah, but it takes time to it takes time to get gather up the Kind of information.


I don't buy that it's just when the tax stuff came out because that seems like something them guys go. Wow, you've got absentee ballots. Yeah car. Yeah just filling them out people fill them out. If it's not works. Here's the thing if that's not real right is turns out to be bullshit. There should be a punishment for that absolute because you are you are absolutely manipulating. You know, it was fun. Remember the kid Jacob wool who got banned on Twitter. This guy would just set up these blatantly fake things like they tried to get I forget it. Maybe Robert Mueller or somebody. They tried to get somebody accused of like sexual assault. He would do these stunts all the time. This kid Jacob wall and he would just he's a fun young guy from Orange County.


I think he's a fun guy and he would just go on Twitter and like try to lick you do fake press conference Joe. They would call the whole media and they would go we're about to reveal something spectacular and crazy and none of it was ever true. And I mean he would just do this over and over again. So that was just this thing. It was just he was just having He's a kid having fun. But when I was going to say is yeah, but if it turns out to be true, there should be punishment as well. And right like when something like that gets revealed and the more of those that turn out to not be true. Like there should be a number of those you could pull off right before we go. Alright, we that we can't listen to you anymore. I and is he there like what? I don't know because I hear that kid is but that kid is but the James O'Keefe guy isn't know she's an intelligent friends.


Yeah that sent me the Omar thing. And they're like, this is very disturbing or well, I think a lot of it is. I mean like we were talking true. They said Is it true you have Trails? Yeah caveat is very true. Those two words are yeah. I mean if I'm in any of the James O'Keefe videos, you know their Ally James O'Keefe has me with a bunch of ballots in my car. We know it's you're driving a cab all sudden. Yeah driving a cab. You know, I got all these ballots and I'm speaking Jamaican accent. Yeah, then yes, unfortunately. Don't know if it's true. I mean it was what it was funny because he was tweeting out that she said something about how vote fraud voter fraud is like this like the numbers of voter fraud are so minuscule like point zero zero zero six percent.


Yeah, then he tweets out the stuff about her and voter fraud, right and I'm wondering how big I don't know. How big voter fraud is. I'm that's something I've no idea. I've never met a person in my life. That's like, you know what I'm gonna do today. I'm gonna go fucking votes. Seven times. I've never met that person. The one thing I mean watching the video just watching it. It's obviously highly edited. So like you can't say it's not an edited video and that doesn't take a lot of things away. But you have to edit the video kind of have to get it right because it's got to be small don't know who the people are that are being covered up. I think when I was so I was reading through people that are like, I think Newsweek was digging into each piece of it today, and I don't know that they could verify everything because they weren't saying that this was necessarily false.


But they asked if that guy worked for who they said he worked for and I don't think they got every sponsored said yes, he verifiably works for this cup of like these people or something, huh? That's where it kind of gets. But why would if someone was doing something that illegal? Why would they be like, who are you strange man with camera come and look under cloth fabric law everywhere. I go crazy. It's James O'Keefe steel. He's just goes I'm just going to figure out a fun conspiracy that's happening. Like he goes out. Like how does he get into these things you can do and then he goes, let's just get some he's in there. I don't know like a YouTube prank show fused would like political expose. The problem is the Twitter stuff. The problem is the stuff where he actually did uncover Executives or excuse me catch employees that were talking about how they make it so that conservative voices don't get hurt.


Yeah, which has a hundred percent a hundred percent, huh? It's real it's real and whether or not it is top down or whether or not the tools are available to employees and they His activist that's possible to right thing to I was reading about this. I think it's about ballot harvesting and according to this article that says that it's actually not illegal in Minnesota, but there have been propositions currently. I think Tulsi gabbard put something up to like have it be made illegal. I think Nationwide so like ballot harvesting is not something I understand what the hell is ballot harvesting ballot harvesting wish I could but as for when I read quickly about it. Certain workers who are not supposed to be paid by anyone which is part of like you're not supposed to be paid for this is right.


It gets muddy. You're allowed to go collect ballots from people to then turn them in right but only three is I think you can't be more than three, right? That's where it gets. Really. Yeah, that's what I read. And this guy had like a whole bag of them little girly girl stuff. I do hon camera you for me come with me. I'll show you my face to preserve the balance some feels off about right. It's still stressful. Little fake but I did want to go to jail, but it might be rigged. He might be the kind of guy that you hired to do something like this because he's a crazy guy works for cab company, right? And you know, he doesn't give a fuck and he doesn't know there's a camera on that care maybe doesn't know as a camera on him and maybe what's edited it is this guy going?


You know, what fuck Trump. I hope I'll fucking if I could wrote 30 times. I'd vote to 30 times that we need to get him out of office. He's fucking racist and he's sexy. He's up there shit, you know, he didn't pay any fuck. Your taxes that fucking guys always going off about socialism. Who's the fucking socialist? Look I got that 30 ballot. I that fucking cheat. I'm a cheater and a liar I get paid. I throw these away I watch that. I was like, what is this like what I mean people should watch it because it's interesting is what is this? What is what is this? Yeah, I mean, it's delectable this election is going to have problems. It's going to be chaos this time in Texas.


Yeah, you see move Before November 3rd. I'm locking myself in my studio. I'm doing my pop doing an event where I go. I'm not leaving the studio until there's a president. Oh, will you be there for years? Well, I hope not but I'm doing I'm gonna slice. Okay, I'm dance gonna be Pollos 48 Hours. You think I'm gonna get that back? Yeah, and she's gonna do all the press conferences from that very beauty salon where students are mask I heard if I think it's the president doesn't accept the results whatever and there is like a time period where it's not decided she does become the oh, yeah, absolutely person charged. She's a speaker of the house. That's how it works. That's real when we need a landslide. We need whoever wins. We need someone to take Florida and Ohio early in the night. I don't know if it counts with out the ballots if they're if they're encouraging mailing about here's a disturbs me when one party wants mail-in ballots in the other party doesn't like why do they want it?


I don't know the answer to this right? I'm just speculating. Why do the Democrats want it and why does Trump not want it Democrats are saying covid going to keep people from voting is it? I don't believe it is I think Come on, is it keeping people from buying groceries is not keeping people from going to Jack In The Box? Yeah, and I know people that these people hate Trump so much. It's like well then have that be your last act. How's that be your last Earthly act? How beautiful would that be all you've done right there. You got all you've done is say this guy's ruin your life every day go and die and get rid of him. I wish there was someone to root for I no no. No. I wish there was someone who just stood out as being like this fucking Perfect person that I really love now.


We don't have I wish it was Tulsi gabbard. I wish I'd fucking vote for naked. Yeah be out there cough my mouth about I'm voting for. Well, there were people that were interesting like Sanders was interesting because he was he didn't seem like he was in the system like everybody else was yeah, but it also seemed like maybe a lot of what he wanted to do never would have gotten done but I was interested to see if he could pull it off I was talking about what people are talking about what he wanted to do versus what he was talking about what he wanted to do. I was like, oh, They're distorting your your voice. They're distorting your narrative and what I had them on the podcast we talked for a while my you're not crazy. Right you just a good guy, right who wants to do well for the working people and your ideas to take a small fraction less than a penny of these speculation trade, right and then take the money off of that and dedicated to social causes like I'm in.


Yeah, I mean if that was what it was, I think a lot of people would have been in but it's he's just one of those small group of politicians that Is it doesn't get the air time like you gave him are time, but you you rightly said he had to explain that in 30 seconds. Yes and under normal circumstances, but then I gave this tepid endorsement of them and they use that with all old jokes you shit that I said, he's homophobic transphobic racist felt that yeah fucking everything and they took him out. They took him out with there and then the fucking DNC all aligned together to get Mayor Pete and Amy Klobuchar Elizabeth Warren also they want I'll dive out I think they quit.


Yeah, and so that they handled by Design would get the yeah, it's the whole thing was dirty and see is rigged this now like twice against him price watch first. They did it. But yeah, Donna Brazil's book talks openly about it, right? You know, I mean twice dude, it's a dirty organization the both dirty, but Square sides are nice. Yes Trump like Trump just lift the Republican Party On Fire. I mean he went in there. He said McCain is not a hero I like People didn't get captured. He's went right at Jeb Bush. I mean they were masked. They were these political Dynasty the Republican Party. He just laid my sleepy laid waste to dabble energy Jabo energy jab just went in there and Sanders was like, oh these are my colleagues in our respective.


I'm like, that's not the way to but that's the reason why he did that is because that's who he really is. I know and that not a bullshitter. He's not full of shit. That's why I liked them. I enjoyed talking to him. And yeah, I really did and I'll get to sit in Vermont. He'll write a book. It was gonna buy that book No One's Gonna He can write it as a little you can have a little ice cream. But if you want in the big game, you got it. You gotta go on thing. You gotta look it Klobuchar Uncle. Shut up you Centrist bitch and then you don't even know what a president of Mexico it is any has to go and just lay waste everybody every time Kamala talked. He should have went cop said it did that's what Trump would have done.


He needed to be the left truck like find towards Santa because this guy's dead. He's in bed with credit card companies in Delaware. He had the worst criminal justice bill ever. That guy's a corpse. Like that's was Sanderson nicknamed everyone like trumpeted corpse cop what's crazy is when there's corruption, but they'll ignore it because it'll it'll interfere with what they want right like this Hunter Biden shit. Yes, bro is crazy. This was Donald Trump jr. And his Hunter the one that passed away or now. We want to still alive. He's the one that took millions of dollars. T he marries of the wife of the brother, I hope so. I don't know something about sucking went wild there right didn't sell the while Jamie some went weird with the brother that died his wife and Hunter.


I think I don't be wrong. Don't quote me on this. But the Scandal is that he took a shit ton of money from Russian billionaires. Right? Isn't that the Scandal Jamie's did double Google and right now hold was lit with a good start with the brother the wife of the mic. Wrong analysis hundred Biden father child with woman while dating brother's widow. Whoa, I mean, this is a well. I'll hold family. Could I see a picture of this girl? Good point she might have been hot as well. Joe Biden is the one on the right? Okay. Hunter and Haley Biden they broke up after nearly two years of dating he filed she filed a paternity suit same month Hunter Biden 249 married Melissa: after just six days of dating, yeah, well, okay, maybe he found the perfect girl after he'd already knocked up this other chick and this other chick he fucking hated but he vowed to take care of the baby, you know, but essentially stating the breeze without their arms resting messy.


Sure. People are messy. Sure. Listen, the brother's dead. Maybe he's in love with the Widow. Maybe it's a perfect relationship. Sounds good. I don't have a problem with that. I mean it's weird. It is strange certainly salacious. It's so odd that Biden is holding up children and sniffing them that that's all drives. Never know what the other thing that bothers me is how much did he get from some billionaire? He got money from a Russian billionaire thing was like some very large amount of money involved in this energy economy. They all find these little scams that nobody knows about and then eventually they come out like once every four years. Election year but I think a lot of them were working for like the same Energy company in the Ukraine that's involved with all of these problems.


Yeah. Well, I mean Hillary Clinton was involved with the Russians. You know, what's hilarious is one meme. It's a really good meme. Yeah here it is hundred Biden receive 3.5 million wild transfer from Russian billionaire. Yeah. Okay. He was briefed about sons and Biden was briefed about son's involvement according to Hunter Biden's Burris mama. Hunter Biden Burris mama, what does that mean? Okay, scroll scroll back o the company's purissima hundred by Joe Biden's son Hunter made money from Russia China. Okay. All right. I don't know maybe he earned the money for I don't know but I just know that it's weird that the media is kind of ignoring it.


Well, the menominee's 100% in the tank. They don't want Trump winning ninety percent of the media. 90% of the Fox News and Candice Holland's middle of two media. She made you know, you have oh Candace knowledge is bigger than any one. She is. She's on she's on Facebook's got like 300 million views. I mean, she's crazy giant. I mean she's and I got to be honest with you. You can't not watch her whether you like her or not. She's very smart. She's very particular. She really knows how to talk. She knows how to talk. But every now and then something wild she'll like she'll do a GoFundMe for like Timothy McVeigh. He's just doesn't suit over Trump Affair story after Fox News argues know responsible viewer takes Tucker Carlson, seriously, their defense was that it's basically like parody almost and that's why it's not Tucker Carlson's parody.


Yeah. No. Yeah his lawyers defense of hit what they were saying was that but this is a smart legal defenses, but they all do that's this is when the all-new that's a sneaky and ago its effects fun that can public time. I've heard in a lawsuit that Fox News is admitted. They're not news their entertainment. Yeah. I think they kind of have to do that like wrestling. Does yes they they don't really wrestling I know what you're saying. I know what you're saying, but they choose to it's a smart move. Yeah little work around. Did you see the thing where Tucker Carlson was playing all these videos of Chris Cuomo talking to Michael Cohen coaching him on what to say when he interviews him did not see that. Oh my God Fox News what CNN just ignored the fuck out of it, they rewarded and pretend it didn't even happen.


Right and they didn't address it at all and Fox News played. Multiple times over multiple nights. It is clearly Chris Cuomo talking to Michael Cohen and he is coaching him on what to say when he talks to him about the hush payments crazy, which is like, I don't know why he would even I don't know why they did that. Well the coma I don't like the idea that one of them is a governor and the other ones in the news. Yeah. I thought oh maybe not friends with Michael Cohen, and he was just trying to help him out as a girlfriend. Like if you were going to be I'm let's just be honest, right? I'm gonna be honest with you folks. Yeah, if Tim Dylan was involved in some fucked up shit. And yeah, I had an interview on my podcast back. What do I say?


It was just you and me alone. I would coach you a hundred percent. I would say this is what you should say, right? Yeah, especially those trying to help you, right? Yeah. I understand that. But if he's friends with that guy I get it. I understand problem is he's a broadcaster on CNN, which is the Cable News Network was what is it now? It's nothing. I mean it's nothing and it's absurd. Yeah, Chris Cuomo is on there talking about he's got Corona. I mean they're doing like Home Videos. I'm like, what is your another Scandal? Here's another Scandal. Yeah. He pretended to have chronic he is there's a little bit of the pretending to leave his basement. I'm pretty sure well. He said it cured it by chest exercise.


I mean, I don't buy that eyes, but here's another one. There's a picture of him sitting at his desk holding a hundred pound dumbbell up in the air and bodybuilders are calling bullshit. Oh interesting. I didn't see that also because of the angle that he's holding now. Yeah, Chris Cuomo is I'm Italian I could say this He's a guinea right? A lot of those guineas are stupid strong their monkey strength that he is there a lot of them. Yeah. Listen and it was a guy right there was a guy that used to run sandwich shop your house who could curl his own body weight 10 times and he nobody believed him and this guy barely lifted weights and he did it before a wrestling meet. It was like a big-time wrestler Newton South and he want to lose.


Losing the wrestling meet was like legend in the town because his arms were blown out because he made like a hundred bucks on a bag showing people that in curls body weight 10 times. I don't know if Frank substance. This is no he's fucking serious, bro. Okay. This is where we get our news. And I'm now who is there's a photo and he's wearing a t-shirt. This is different. That's real. That's a real weight whether or not that weighs a hundred pounds. It might weigh a hundred pounds. I don't believe that he has a fake hundred pound weight. He's a big person. I think that guy's is a pretty large. I'm sure he's not. I'm sure the weight isn't fake.


That's the picture. Here's the thing. I saw these people that are complaining and saying it's not real and all this shit. I listen you can do that that can be done people think you can't do that or crazy. He's bigger than me. Look he's bigger than me. And there's a video of me on Instagram with a 92 pound kettlebell and I'm cleaning it and pressing it ten times over my head, right? He's bigger that guy's a lot bigger than me, right. He can hold a hundred pounds over his head and put it like that. Like if I have a hundred pound dumbbell in my much my arm right now, I could press it. He's The me, he could do it.


Some people are fucking strong. Yeah, I don't have any problem with doing that. It's when he does. Look at this challenge to Chris Cuomo prove. You're not a liar prove. You can actually lift that weight you're showing with see this guy just wants attention because you should know that there's people that are freak strong that could lift that I like Frank's Country Store throwing a thousand guys named Frank's Country Store Newton Newton. It was in Newton Newton number Falls somewhere in Newton Massachusetts Newton Center. That's such a great Boston story where it's like the guy loses the team we will to rest will talk about because nobody Subs there because we'd walk there from school and by subs from Frank attack, I could curls on body weight 10 times. It was a tank just a legend.


He was just a fucking stacked little guinea right like this five foot seven guy who's like five foot seven. Why? I don't mind people not liking Trump. It's weird when they're like Angry like I see Chris Cuomo like an angry. They're angry but isn't that his job? It shouldn't be but it's entertainment like Tucker Carlson's entertainment. He's entertainment on the other side. Yeah, but anyway Tucker Carlson's been ruthless like say a lot about Tucker Carlson, that guy is very good. He's on point shitting on people. Yeah and being smug about it and being cool areas. If you look at a lot of where he stands politically is not he's not Like a corporate right wing, I mean, I'll listen. He's wealthy. He's from a rich family blah blah blah, but he actually seems to like find a lot of Merit in some of the more socialistic type programs like he talks about he balances his statements are very well balanced them out and like you'll watch him and you'll go this guy doesn't seem like some radical lunatic but he's in that category where he's everyone's like, oh, he's a white supremacist always a racist, right?


You don't even give him a chance that nobody wants chance. But this is this is how partisan we are. Politically divided we are right when nobody wants to listen to anything that anybody says that even doesn't even agree with them at. All, right. There's a great fucking documentary from a few years back about the 1960s and it is I think it's called bitter and I mean since I've talked about it before it's Gore Vidal versus well enough alkylate. Yeah, Savannah me best event. That's enemies. Yeah, it's amazed unbelievable. It's so good. Yeah, and you have this This conservative and William F Buckley who really seems like a cunt and you got Gore of a doll who's like my version of what a liberal should be.


That's what I like, right and intelligent open-minded very well-read very articulate person. Right? I love that debate because right and then when Gore Vidal gets under William F Buckley skin, and he says crazy shit to him and he says like he says, I'll sock you. Yes, some real various something customer fit, but Very dated like you'll stay plastered or something else. Fuck you in Old Times. Yeah. Yeah a new political cartoon fight. Yes, but he was like obviously lost his cool. And yeah, I lost the debate because of that but now we couldn't have a debate we have to hide the location because there would be riots outside. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah.


Everybody would pit fire alarm. Yeah be credible shooting fireworks into the debates that you can't even have a remotely controversial non-orthodox opinion. And yeah, and it's and I hate to say this because I am a left-wing person. Yeah, it is from the left. Right? The left are the people that are doing this for the most part the right might they might mock people on the left, but they're not trying to shut down speech or right is not well the right used to do it. They did it a lot in the 90s. They did it a lot with art. They did a lot with people that were anti-religion. They did it a lot like the family values Catholic all those coalition's used to do it a lot. They used to do it a lot when a cartoon.


Something they didn't like the left of that tooth out dude. Yeah, pretty cool. No tip or was the one who's trying to stop the r absolutely but she was kind of course quite a hundred percent, but she was kind of an anomaly at that point. It was a lot of his come to the Christian right? But now all of that has been transferred to the left. Yeah. That's why it's so confused. I'm actually it's transferred to the left was supposed to be about like, you know tolerance. Yeah, well open-minded views. I remember there was a forget the artist name, but he had a piece called Piss Christ and it was but remember that it was like during Giuliani. Yes. I remember it. Yeah, it came to Boston because I remember it was a crucifix emerged in Europe. That's there. Is this endres Andres Serrano?


It's a small plastic Rusev was submerged in a glass tank filled with piss for with his own piss and people were losing their fucking minds that this guy dumped a plastic statue in a bucket of piss rice like pawning it off. Yeah. It was like there was like Civil War about this was such a fucking yeah, he's real big issue. Yeah, and I want to say I don't look at the date here bonuses like 87. We 85 85. Yeah, he's probably just thinking about that I want is yeah, I would this was post-high school for me and I was still trying to figure out what made sense. Yes. I was like, I was first I was just get that.


It's those 87 means I was 20, which means I was just getting out of the house. I was just Ting out of the house when I was 20 and I was living my friends and I was kind of a loser who's also a winner like was a martial arts winner, but I was a loser as far as like if you looked at me on paper. Yeah. What are you doing with your life kid like problem. Yeah. It was a problem and I was trying to figure out what made sense and I heard about this and I went to see it and I also have went to see Yoko Ono Art Exhibit one of the one of the Yoko Ono our pieces Yoko Ono this was she had Block of wood with nails in it and there was a box of nails and a hammer and she encouraged people to participate in the art like she wanted you to pick up a nail and knock it into the wood.


Wow. That was that was her art. She's like I want to encourage participation. And so I had a bit about it back then I was like if you want to encourage participation take the nail. Put it on your forehead be a fucking liar on my blog folded. Yeah, this is what I was an open microphone. Yeah, that's our final you look at that and it's so bad, but you certain comedy specials will be remembered like that. Oh, yeah certain things. Yeah certain comedy special be like, oh that was our nail moment. Yeah. Don't try that. We've already figured out the art form. You don't need to reinvent it with no audience. We do it. Yeah, there's no need the yeah. I mean, it's crazy to you now, everybody's and this is probably you know, this is probably over inflated all that Spotify stuff. Is this just Father they have literally said nothing to me about it right here.


Oh right never come up. Now. Is there someone at Spotify this complaining about the Abigail schreyer episode? I'm sure right. I'm sure there's someone is complaining about it. Is it a transphobic episode? It's not they're wrong. They're not it's nothing to do with that. It has to do with the fact that human beings are actually malleable. We all know that that's why Cults exist, right? There's a there's a thought process now that if you're talking at all about trans people you have to To be 100% supportive you can never questioned whether or not children should be allowed to transition babies Ram own blockers for prepubescent. Children all this is madness. Like here's the question.


Are there some people who are horribly sad that they trans that they transitioned and regret it terribly the answer is yes, right. Are there some people that are very happy they transitioned and there. It's more happy in the gender of their choice while they feel then the gender of their birth. The answer is also yes, right because people are they vary wildly what she's talking what Abigail's talking about in her book irreversible damages large clusters of kids who are mostly kids that are socially awkward many of them are autistic many of them have never had any praise at all in their life and they transition and they get all this praise from people right because it is right now it's involved to social to agent amongst that Substances Act people and they're hot they're at high risk for their easily influenced.


And yes, that was the problem that word contagion was one of the things they had an issue with is it all that the deeply transphobic? It's not transfer occasion is also used to talk about like diseases. So that's but that's not but but yeah, it is language and this is the problem is that they look at this and they say this is openly trans phobic. It is not transphobic. It's not transphobic. No, it's not I There's got to be a space for conversation. And I think that a lot of this, you know, rigid, you know allegiance to I mean, listen, we all know that trans people are in many cases are much happier when they transition and they have better productive fulfilling lives everybody.


I don't think anybody does like there are people that don't want that but they're probably a minority but here's what we as a small minority spectrum of human beings and their happiness is so fucking broad. Yeah that to say that all heterosexual people are happy or Homosexual people happy or all trans people happy is nonsense not she's crazy. Right when you talk about a particular issue where the uptick of girls transitioning it's called rapid onset gender dysphoria psychological psychologists are talking about this like it's a real issue because there's an uptick of several thousand percent over the last decade there looking at this and trying to figure out what the fuck is going on, right? So when that does happen, yeah, if you can't discuss it you you you we've found ourselves.


In this terrible place where there's no longer Nuance, there's no longer in front of discussion. And you have decided that a subject is off bounds or out of boundaries. Now if people think that I should have trans people on and talk to them about it. I'm happy to do that. Right, but that's not what they're saying right now. I don't know what the actual conversation has been from Spotify talking to these employees. But if there are these employees are listening I would tell you emphatically I am not in any way in Trans not in any way in any way I am 100% for people being able to do whatever they want. As long as it doesn't harm other people if you choose to do anything, whatever you want, whatever your personal choices I'm happy.


If you're happy, I don't care. I'm course 100% open-minded. But if you say that I can't talk about something when a woman wrote a whole book and research too deeply in his talking about not not just these children themselves that have Have grown up and then gotten out of school and then realize they've made a horrible mistake and it's irreversible. That's the name of the book irreversible damage and we can't discuss this. Look I had a friend who reached out to me and was saying thank you because my daughter has friends and four of them just decided they're trans together and they're all awkward and I've been trying to tell her that this this is probably statistically not even possible that they would all be translated. This this is the might be something else and then they read this book or they hear about this conversation and without even looking into Just decided that it's transphobic.


It's not transphobic to say that some people regret transitioning. It's just a part of being a person right people look people are so malleable. They're so easily influenced and for us to deny that doesn't do anybody any good anybody in the service. So this is the main issue they had with that. You know, this is the the apparently this is the main problem. They had was this one particular episode and I'm sure they've had issues with other episodes as well. Well, but like I said before I like we're I'm talking off the top of my head and a lot of times I'm saying shit that I don't even mean because I'm saying it because this is a fucking podcast. If you have a problem with people saying terrible shed you work for Spotify.


Maybe you should listen to some of the lyrics right? Okay, because some of the lyrics and some of the fucking music do you guys play over and over and over again makes my shit pale in comparison hail, right if you're in listening to some rap music right now. Yeah, I'm not anti rap. I love rap music. I'm fuckin say it all two and a half to go back and listen to NWA right go go back and listen to like some of the early shit right going likes go back and listen to Ice-T. Cop killer when the body count. Yeah day, right? Yes. Well, yeah a lot of rap is not female folk. Yes. I'm a fan man. I fucking love rap music. I'm a big fan of look. I met Willie D from the Ghetto Boys recently when I was delighted gigs in Houston. I was like a little kid in a candy store right?


I'm a huge Geto Boys fan. I love rap music, but It's it's the standard we're going to apply a standard. It is a type of Art and talking shit is also type of art. You might not like that type of art because it seems too much like a real statement right? Sometimes it is a real estate, right and sometimes it's just talking shit. Yeah, but just fine as in deciphering which is which and price I mean half the fucking time that you and I are talking. Yeah, if you took a we say it out a quote which is one of the things they did with the Bernie Sanders saying took things and put them in quotes and some of them were so ridiculous. Yeah, but that that is what People do when they're trying to discredit someone and it's what they're doing is they're they're not being honest. This is not it's not an honest take it's not it's not a real honest take on who a human being is this denial of nuance.


It's a denial of all the complexities that make a human being but deciding like you said this and you said Meghan McCain, you know, I saw, you know, fuck these tips, right you fuck you're a bad person. You're a bad person. I mean she had a baby with her dad. It's certainly possible but I didn't get that. This is I get it if you're twenty three-year-old woke kid and you know, you're working for this company thinking to put your foot down. Well, you're gonna guess in the beginning of tech everybody that got an attacker was like that records. It was woke to the people that are like, right but here's listen me on the outside reading these fucking articles. Yeah, like, oh my God Spotify censoring Rogan spotify's doing this but it's not half ba defy has said nothing.


Yeah. Listen to me. Nothing. I haven't said anything to my manager. Haven't said anything to me. They said nothing, right? They've apparently had meetings but they have a lot of meetings right? They have meetings about all sorts of shows have meetings about the music they have they have meetings about they have people that have problems especially in this day and age. Look, it's a great company. They're open-minded. They treat their employees very, well. They let him have discussions about things and I don't know what these discussions are. Like, I don't know what happens. I really don't but in terms of like them silencing me zero, right? There's been nothing. Right, there's been nothing. Yeah, and then will the new thing I was Roe v-- Wade, right with the new Supreme Court Justice is a big deal.


What was always interested me about that lady has like 80 kids. She wants got a lot of children fuck and make base. What she's a Catholic woman who likes being on her back and God love her and she's a smart judge and bread that see she loves she loves Christ and her husband and babies and babies and she's adopted some of them are adopted. She brought them in flew them in listen. Yeah, you know God bless her. Yeah abortion is a fucking it's a weird conversation weird one. Why because it's a it's a particularly human subject right where it's like a messy one. We're like I'm a hundred percent in favor for a woman having her right to choose. Let's just get out of the way right away. I'm a hundred percent pro-choice. Right but when it's like 9 months old, like what age five months, I'm five me.


I'm in favor of abortion four months up until 18 years old up until up until they start attending meetings and Spotify and complaining. That's what I think you should be able to Aboard your kids but we anybody who says you are anti-abortion. Yeah. Okay, like okay. What if it's two cells, right? What if the process so this is our people that are against stem cell research. They were against any type of you know contraception in many cases, maybe not but let's generalize. Yep. No, but they are a lot of time a lot of sure that our hardcore anti-abortion are like we shouldn't be doing anything right condoms, you know good birth controls. Those people were crazy. I know they're crazy. So those people create a wild but you know, I'm also the late term abortion. People are crazy.


Is a crazy people does a baby like that is it? Thanks that baby's alive. Yeah, if you took it out of the body, it would be alive. That's crazy. That's a weird one man. It's very strange, but people will take a hard line ideology party stance. They like I'm left wing. I believe in abortion rights. No matter what and if you say up till eight months, what do you think about eight months? We think about nine months can't do that can't do that sweet but some people believe in that. Yeah, and it's just it's such a huge. Human issue because it's so there's so many things going on there Roe v-- Wade, if it's overturned goes to the states. It's not really possible. I guess not really possible.


I mean, it could be theoretically make women carry rape babies. I don't know here's what would happen. I think would go back to the states, right? It was so it wouldn't be a ban on abortion. It would just make it a states rights decision. So there would be abortion in still most Americans it what you got. I don't agree with I think it should be available in all 50 states. I think those people want to cut off Federal funding any type of federal funding for it. Available in every state right now, I believe so. Yeah federally it has to be I believe so. Yes. Yeah, that is what Roe v-- Wade stands for that. He has to what happens is if they get rid of that and States would vote on it and states with decide what the appropriate they would have to make their laws. See the problem is what if there's an 18 year old girl. Angela bortion United States is legal 73 case abortions legal in all states.


Every state has at least one abortion clinic. There you go. But here's the thing like if you're If you make it the states rights and a girl just turns 18 and Allah comes into place and all aboard you get shut down. She doesn't have any money. He's fine. She's fucked. She's pregnant and she's know what to do. And also if she's to pour right before exactly state where you can get an abortion. What would you find them be able to go to it in her state rights far away exactly. It's very tough. It's tough. I mean it's one of those issues where I think that we're never going to have everyone on the same page. We just have to realize that there's issues in America. We're not at were never going to come together.


We're never going to come together 100% on that. Yeah, as long as you still have people with a very kind of religious tradition view of when life begins. Yeah, because you can't argue with somebody who says if Life Begins the minute it that you have conception then stem cell research, which is very beneficial to people The good news is that stem cell research has advanced to the point where they don't have to do that. Well, the good news is to people I think are getting smarter and realizing that they can't legislate Things based on a book that was written 2,000 years or whatever. I mean you hope that that's the case but now, you know we have now they're legislating from the you know, but they're writing the book says we're writing the new religions as we speak. So this lady that Trump wants to any comment about what is her deal Catholic judge only been judged for three years like I taught ya but I think is only on the district court for three years or something.


She's he want. He likes her. She's a traditionalist Catholic the anti-abortion people dig her. I mean, although in Coulter doesn't think she's conservative enough. So it was like it's a weird mix out there of like she's a woman so it's very tough for people to say. Well they are slamming or now. They're slamming her because she has two black kids which is pretty disgusting that she adopted from Africa, which is pretty heinous that they're they're they're writing all these things about. Oh, she's still a racist or let me tend it. Going in our family. It's so grotesque that yeah, that's doing heinous that they doing throughout task. She's she's obviously if she's got that many kids. She's obviously a person who cares about children kids about Trish not a bit like this is what I don't understand.


I don't understand why trying to make this woman into a monster but what they're they're already done help it because they want someone Crystal they want Biden to win and they want someone to come in. It's going to be nominated by my opener. My open has a great joke about that this guy again Connie. He basically says that life happen. I was he basically said he's like Biden's getting lowered into the ground a day after you know, you ready. She's got three week. We its president Kamala you're voting for Kamala you really are so he made a good point there. So it's like Biden's like Biden's gonna spend a few months in the Oval Office couple photo ops and then kamala's getting in and you're going to jail. Yeah. He just wants to get it on the books. Yeah fire one. Yeah. I really did it and then face plant done.


Yeah bounce hardwood floors mile is coming in. And then everybody turn character and then she's gonna Yas Queen away all over lock everyone up ya know. What so what maybe we need that? Maybe we all need to go to jail. I'm open. Maybe that's the only way we turn this country around we won't be able to go so far crazy people on the left. Yeah. That way we come back to the middle maybe like everyone. So angry at Trump would be good time to take the trade here easy train on the left-hand panel in jail, then troms? Sherwood. Yeah, Russia has yeah grab ya know that withhold evidence. Oh, yeah, Katie prosecutor. Oh, yeah people in jail after they were supposed to be released to use them as cheap labor for the state like wildfires.


I've heard one good figure recently is that she's into decriminalizing marijuana. Whoo, I'm fun for you baby. Here we go. Let's do it. She come on Kamala. Come on. She's coming around and let's party. She'll be nice presents you Max think about it. She'll be into criminalizing tweets. She's the hottest vice president. She'll be into criminalizing Facebook statuses. You think so now I who knows I get really Worried about what could happen with big tack if they're if they just you know are allowed to run amok run a model cuts and Trump hasn't done anything to stop them. Nothing. What is he doing? I don't know much now, I think he did a very anemic week thing where he was like you can now try to answer these try to Institute some appeals process if you get the platform, but it doesn't have any teeth.


These are private companies that can do they want. So the real debate is like are they public utilities? Are they private companies? I don't know the answer to that. I'm not not smart enough to figure out the pros and cons of either but I just know that when you have such a small three or four companies, these motherfuckers have more power than Carnegie Rockefeller all of the piano. I mean these people have access to your thoughts. Look at this Trump judge blocks Trump's administration's ban on new tic toc downloads from u.s. App Stores tried to do that. You overstepped Authority with Tick-Tock man, but The Tick-Tock thing is slightly different because we're not talking about Tick-Tock Banning anybody Tick-Tock. I'll take anybody. They're not better than anybody right with tick-tock. As long as the low bay are they are taking information from you and in an astonishing rate.


Yes, like they had an engineer back-engineered software and he said this is the worst violation of privacy features have ever seen ever in any application. Right? Like, it's Madness Christ. It's following you but let me ask a question if they looked at it us companies aren't they doing of that? And I'm not saying that are trying to should have our information but like aren't Google and Facebook aren't they? Do this is one thing is one step up for apple and I'm very happy that Apple did this. Yeah apple just stepped up recently and now apple is going to make it so that you have to pull this up because I don't want to I don't want to butcher this because this is actually pretty important. There's Facebook is furious about this because you will it will limit the amount of ads like you have to sign off on whether or not they can sell your data.


Okay, whereas before and Facebook saying this is going to cut our money in half like right if you give people the option Say do you want us to do you want Facebook to be able to sell your data and your like Focus out right? Then when no one's going to say that most people going to if you have to click yes or another going to say no, but do we believe them that that was the only way they're getting our data look at this app ad tracking iOS 14 will give users the option to decline a pad tracking but no, it's not the only way but this is a big deal is a big step so scroll up, please so you're either a new version of iOS wouldn't be the same without a bunch of security and privacy updates app on Monday announced a ton of new features have been bacon iOS 14 expected out later this year with the release of new five iPhones and iPads.


So we'll use a little allow users to share your approximate location with apps instead of your precise location. It allow apps to take rough location of your identifying precisely where you are. Another option users will have is when they give over the location of the bubble bubble, but I want the wait a minute Cameron Mike recording here is a will also get a camera and microphone recording indicator on the status bar. Oh my Is that what that light is? Then someone's been recording me all day long shit. This is what I mean. Dude the comp there. They're just recording. This is what I mean all day long could be motherfuckers. I'm talking shit about people to is likely jalops up. I guess how about I'd like permission to track you across apps and websites owned by other companies.


Wow. I just think that yeah, obviously opt out but I just think it's like data has become what it's they say more valuable than oil. I mean, we're going to find a way to harvest that data from you whether your consent if you're not know if that's the case they have up until now but if Apple can figure out a way because it doesn't benefit them. Here's what these apps harvest the data would it benefits them is if the apps give them a piece of the pie when you sign up and there's some apps that now or requiring subscription on their website, they'll We just start giving people a better deal on certain things if they share their data. I mean that that will enable people to go. Hey, I want to save a few bucks. I don't care if you wanted me Not absent probably the direction they're going.


Well. There's a great Vibe these billions of billions of dollars of selling, but it's not whether or not they give up Apple Cuts them out of it, and then everybody has a choice you can get a Google phone get an Android phone and then you just give away all your information for free or apple into Steve's new Privacy Law. Laws or privacy features and you get to decide who tracks you you get to decide whether or not they can use your information and sell it you get to decide whether or not you get ads right you right. I'm all if that Apple does that will commit to them forever right? This this data your data is a commodity that you never really signed off on and you didn't even realize look there's benefits to it.


Right? Like if your phone knows how much how many minutes it takes for you to get home. You just look at your phone. It says Tim you'll be home in 20. It's like okay great write it but how does it know that because it's tracking it, right? If your phone knows what you like and where you're going or what's on your calendar where there's certain convenience has to it tracking you right? And there's trade-off that is that you lose all you know privacy. Yeah. Yeah, but the trade-off is positive is like say if you go to a website and it recommends you and add and the ad is like some things you're into like, you know, maybe you've been looking for a nice Yeti Tumblr that it recommends that you let go hold it ends up being Ding okay, if you always trusted the government if you always trusted the federal government, that's not the government.


Well bosses companies. Yeah, but there's government people that are using that information hundred but that is not the real problem. The real problem is government is companies rather like Facebook are literally making hundreds of billions of dollars off of your data, right and you like well, what are you providing you're providing a way to I get addicted way that I'm just arguing with my Grandma about people they want to keep you on the You know, that's what they want. But it's there's an argument to be made that this is a commodity that no one knew was a commodity until it was too late. Right? Yeah, and it was the cat was already out of the bag. Yeah, it's too big.


It's a big thing. It's a big thing. Yeah. It's a gigantic thing and if a company comes along like apple and says, you know what you shouldn't be allowed to do this. We're going to make it's like if you want to give away your privacy right? You should have a little box. Oxy check on every little app that you saw and then if that comes along I will be a fucking loyal Apple customer for life. I just think whether it's the government or whether its private corporations. The whole fear here is that malevolent forces are Bad actors get ahold of this data, right it dude. And so that is the major problem whether it's an intelligence agencies, whether they're keeping tabs on you for a reason, you know Snowden use this signal right? Do you know what that is? I don't know what it is.


It's listen iOS is far more secure than SMS, right? Right, but I am iOS whether it's iMessage iMessage is more secure than SMS. If you have a Google phone unless you're using Whatsapp. You're sending it a regular text message. What is this? Speak? Freely signal this is what Snowden recommends and the thing about it is it's encrypted you to me and it doesn't go to a third party. So iOS, if you have an iMessage, it goes to the Apple server signal does not. Okay. So signal If you and I are making sending messages to each other on sampling to this, right and you can set it so that your message self-destructs and two minutes.


Wow. Yeah, there's different. There's different things you can do but it's not going somewhere else or someone else can intercept it. It's all encrypted right SMS. Would you have if you have an Android phone I have an Android phone and I have an F7 iPhone. My iPhone is iMessage, but occasionally like the green text message those green text. Was anybody can pick up wrapped eggs and they're all so disgusting on the van. They look hollyweird vomit color. Don't look that bad. We have the night in mode on now. They did find them. Why do you have an Android? Is it took to fill without the poor people feeling? I like to have both operating system. And because look this doesn't look that bad. Look at that green. Tim pool has an Android since we Android I was I look at that green and I reminded her sewage.


I'm running of golfing. Yeah, maybe a nice pool table green green cloth. Yeah apps iOS is more secure. It's more secure in that regard like iMessages more. Secure the thing about IMS. Is this Superior? There's a couple things one the big one is pictures. If you send me a picture an iMessage, it's a big high resolution picture. If you send me a video it's a nice high resolution video and you can send it to me through airdrop and it's like in perfect quality, right? If you send me a fucking video through a Google phone, it comes out looking like a flip phone from the late 90s, right? It's so bad. Yeah, I've sent it to people. I'm like, oh my God. I have a one of my notes a Galaxy Note.


Yes. Beautiful phone is like beautiful screen high resolution. The camera the video is amazing. Yeah, but if I text it to somebody it's bad. It looks fucking poison dog shallick see cameras, like a lot of Android cameras are better than iPhone cameras are not better. Okay, they're just great very good. They're really good. But so is this they're really everything's great. Now they're all great Sony makes ridiculously good cameras on their phones. They have an experience. I think it's an experience to 1 or 1 to I think it's called I forget what it is. But they have like amazing video stabilization and all these different like their cameras are off the charts. And if you're a photographer the Sony ones allow you to get in there and tweak shit.


And so the Samsung ones do you do a lot of tweaking and fucking with this settings and Samsung has incredible Zoom. Like they have this Galaxy S 20 Ultra and it has this crazy zoom on it man because your movies a lot of those and the iPhone amazed. Yeah and the Galaxy also has a five thousand milliamp battery. So it's like the battery last you forever, but you still sending text messages. They haven't figured out an encrypted version of a messenger. So unless you have friends, you got to talk them into getting WhatsApp or you got to talk them into using signal. It's like why can't they get that shit together and they don't even have an ability to transfer data like like you can't send me a picture through Bluetooth.


Like if you have an Android phone and I have an iPhone. You can't send me a picture not native. At least. I mean we might be applications that are after the fact now. Yeah, they're just not quite there yet. They're not there yet, but I still didn't feel like it's just you know, it's a system of control that is going to be more and more omnipresent. His another thing I should say when I have an if my Samsung phone my texts are not green. I can make my text any color I want. Okay, it's totally customizable. I like just on my only ever you're texting me. I've only ever seen the green ones. You've only seen them come to you, correct? Because I message they when they make you look like shit. I send a green text. They know people hate it. I know Comics like you make I want this about how dare you love mean.


It's just custom. Yeah, it's just it's weird that Google hasn't figured that out than Android hasn't figured out a way to make a version of like iMessage that works on iMessage. It's like I guess I Apple has it locked down they want it locked down. Yeah, that seems to be what they want they want you and now they won't Arnold. Yeah wall guard that seems to be the issue now is that you can't do anything without being in business with some of these companies whether it's Facebook YouTube Google Amazon, like you have those five companies that run Tech you got to be in business with them. If you want anything you got to be on the grid. You don't really have too much of an option and now they're instituting this thing saying. Oh, well, you can you know, you can opt out of the data but I guarantee they find a workaround with that probably won't work around and and that that's really showing then you start thinking about like what kind of now they want.


They want to get a car if you want everybody to be in Fleet of self-driving cars. This is something that People wanted me Gavin Newsom. I said, let's face our cars by 2035. Well, he said phase-out gasoline cars, of course gasoline cars, but he's a fucking idiot this. Yeah the fact that they're doing this in the middle of like then they have their education system is falling apart. These poor kids were getting a terrible education before their top priority should be fixing their education system. And he said yeah how much time are they wasting putting together this thing this virtue signaling thing where you're trying to make band cars that New cars that are gasoline cars by against their employer. Yeah, their whole argument is now that the fires are here and people realize that it's a problem blah blah blah.


That's true. There's a political will but listen you got to fix what you haven't fixed accursed agree. You know, I mean, well, the other thing is, you know, they pass a carbon tax in New York City and they started who burst started costing a lot more money a lot of people in New York City use Uber pools to get to work because the subway in New York, which is an old Legacy system doesn't always run efficiently. So people that were going to work and who Uber's and specially the pool bar pool feature. It was very cheap. They instituted a carbon tax and a congestion tax all the sudden the Uber rates went up and now people were unable to couldn't afford to get to work. So it's like yes, you're helping the environment but your damning people in that respect. Here's my favorite thing that just passed their allowing transgender inmates to go to the prison of the gender.


They choose so violent fail sex offenders are fixed who decided they're trans can go to women's prisons that's going to work out. Well, there's Way that's gonna be bad. No, no, no the brass that Bridget feta see sent me a thread on Twitter where this this journalist goes over all of the issues that they've had with people turning Trans in Canada and doing this and all the horrible people that have gotten into female prisons using it and the difference between female prisons in male prisons about how much more violent male prisons are and how horrific our female prisons violent barely well that Eris is Pointing. Yeah, the I am telling women going in there and I'd like to believe that they are they they're violent.


I think some of them are not violent. Damn it. I think I just want to Quality Joe. Well, I don't have I'm is yeah. I just want a quality of violence to happen. I want women out there beating the shit out of each other throwing each other through mostly pillow fights. Yeah, they're in their underwear. They just talking shit about each other's waiting for guys come and fuck them. Yeah, so that's girls prison. Fighting and cattiness. It's all only fans yet what percentage has only fans groan during the pan massively? Well, everyone's become a whore. I mean everyone people that were one or two seconds.


I didn't know how many people are one step away from legitimate prostitution. I I've told several of my friends are better looking than me be a whore like do it because there's no job Christina pazsitzky was explaining this to me. Yeah, yeah her and Tom are moving out here by the way. Yeah, and they were out here the other day we went to dinner and she was telling me that Aaron Carter says name of the singer with the tattoos on his face as a little meth is gotta only fans account and he jerks off in front of people. Well listen makes a lot of money apparent good for him. His career has been not great. She said it in front of my kids though. She's like Jane is he? That's who she said my kids. Yeah. So he's Jane is D. Yeah on only fans and I'm like, well, no one knows what that means. Well there I mean, It's one of the only jobs laughs if I come over his eyes are lighting up.


Shhh. Listen, it's you're either a cam girl or you're instigating a race for those are the odd jobs Rosie the two jobs in America. There it is. Oh Aaron Carter is now doing porn former. Child pop star recently joined. Cam soda. Oh same shit. So he was a former Defense tattoos a child. Oh pop star. Well, they're real new. Yeah, Eric. I mean, he's face tattoos. I mean you see everybody in LA with them a lot of these young people have them. Yeah. A lot. Well, not everyone but a lot of these kids in La have them and they just OKC had and only fans is but it was in the Backstreet Boys. Can you not do porn on only fans like me whatever you want really but most people use it for 27 bucks a month.


Look at him holding his pecker. Yeah. Yeah people really people get on only fans because they want a reasoned discourse. Well, what was it 72 bucks? Oh for three months. What is the the most a gal can charge you can get a lot and I've seen people then explaining how this whole system works for them in like They have a whole it's not pyramid scheme. But like if I got you guys to both sign up for a certain amount of time. I get shares of your money to Y is like incentives for growth real it's a it's a bit. So he got a bunch of his other buddies to Jay their days in front of yeah, but you never got him a pimp. That's what pimps used to say to hookers. They believe find a few of your friends. Yes. This is just laying Maxwell. There's no difference 227. This is you feel like wow, how many fans does he have doesn't tell you that part?


I guess he's private and details of keep private. Not safe for work content hundred 1200. That's it. Miss is a I don't know if this is better than doing Cameo. Okay. Well, let's thank you for doing it's not cameos. So he's really making somewhere in the neighborhood of 30 grand a month James D 1202 point that is only seven blast bad ones that bad. It's not bad. It's better than working. Listen if he had a work a job, but he had that thing on his face and people like you're the guy who Jesus DVD They get mad go back to doing that Shawn up. I'm just trying to work it but it's amazing how that during the pendency because everyone's home.


Nobody's doing anything. I guess everybody's just jerking off and landings and plays guitar in the nude dancing fan qas other sultry activities that you guys love these playing guitar in the nude. He still try to hold on to it. You know what I mean? Like, he's like, I got a new song and everyone's like buddy. Let me see your asshole. Yeah, that's not what this is spread your cheeks. He's like I wrote this about yet. No one. Can you fit the Can your ass bleep I paid money. I'd paid American money. I'd be very disappointing the papers only fans and then he's strumming a guitar. Maybe the music's really good. It's not how do you know? I'm guessing it's not Joe. He throws a fit in court after ordered to Forfeit guns 500 of them use Force.


Oh my God a result of his sister. Was this a scroll back up Sister Winnie a restraining order K. So well, that's not good. He's threatening a lot of these people that get famous. Very young. It's a very rough it's a Off-road it is unmanageable. Yeah, I don't know anybody who's Managed IT. Yeah, Miley Cyrus was on the podcast couple weeks ago. And I told her I said, you know, you've done it about as good as you could do it, right? She's a she's got a lot of barriers up though. You tell you could tell she's through it. Yeah can't get that famous that young. She's 12 years old playing Arenas. How the fuck it's crazy. Yeah, man. I mean I just who and it was funny her talking about on the show.


Show that was it. Her mom or grandma was saying well, it's better than her beating La doing drugs. Like what dragon? Why is that the choice like will Utah or better than being back home doing drug? Like I say felt like this is her ticket out of the life of butthurt. She was never going to be her life or dad is a famous country music star her voice is so harsh. He's got a great. She's a she's a phenomenal Talent. Oh my God. She's amazing. I mean her talking voice is so harsh. Yeah. It sounds like mine a little it's rougher. Wow. Oh, yeah. Oh, yes and mine want to play it. Let's play some of it play some of her place on the listen. And by the way, I should say is I'm not knocking her. I'm a fan and this one right people are gu Spotify bitch put my service on now, I fucking love Miley Cyrus, right?


I really do. I'm a giant I think what it stands for. Oh my God, right forty-five-year-old weakest in Florida at X-ray and it kind of shows you almost like in those thermal type colors of the activity of your brain. There we go. So he had a mission cooperation on her. Throat she had like and she still saying was it polyps? Oh, yeah, look at me. Go. Kill Ragan. Hang. Yeah, great. Well, that's good. Dude. I listened to her music before I told her this I play I showed her an image of me before. I fill my Netflix special. I was listener song Malibu and like dancing around backstage. Wow gets my mind off of yeah, that would accommodate. Oh, yeah just a little trying to lose myself. And yeah, and I've been a big fan of hers for a long time. I think she's fucking super talented man.


Her voice is beautiful. Yeah. Yeah her for her you ever heard her cover of Joel. Since amazing far I mean, it's great so good. It's let's hope let's hope she's not on only fans and shittiest vocal cord surgery will require weeks of Silence to recover. And this was in 2019. Yeah. All we need chump to do is like I was going to say a vocal cord surgery but is his biggest thing is Twitter. So it doesn't matter you can't I mean his but you couldn't that's what's great about Donald Trump. He could lose his voice and it wouldn't matter he could still inflamed people with just his fingers. Yeah. How does hands on it? Maybe even be better if you had one of those. Yeah, Ryan O'Brian debate is tomorrow night.


That's all right, it's crazy. Are you going to be here you give you doing a show after the show in San Antonio tomorrow night. There's a few tickets left, but we I just added it because I said I just want to do a show while I'm here and everything in Austin is RP Cap City. Great Club is not open. I'm hoping we can bring it back. Wow, I'm gonna bring this I'm gonna open up a club here. I hope one day. Yeah. I miss some it a lot of things. I'm in the middle of a lot of things. I'm working on a lot of stuff. A lot of things happening. Yeah, but that will be one of the things that I'm going to work on. That would be great. I mean, none of us know when the stores opening. Nobody knows anything about anything in La my concern is I don't want there's a bunch of things. I don't want anybody getting sick. Of course. I want to be able to do it where you know, the people who work there wait staff and folks can be safe and can make a living there have been talks about promising vaccines that are there showing promise.


There's four in trial. Yeah. So Jeremiah AstraZeneca Johnson & In isn't one of them. I believe that's one of them and then Pfizer I like there's there's there's a few that are and I spoke to Doctor Who said they all seem to their safety ratings are good, but their effectiveness is that's what's going to be debatable, but he did say it's better to have safe vaccines. It may not work as well because you could always get other ones instead of ones that have all these other problems Jesus Jamie waxing trial stop after neurological symptom active. Listen, I'm glad you tell us the tree go back to our Carter's dick. We're trying to be positive. Jesus drug maker says it halted a Coronavirus. Vaccine study because a woman who received the experimental shot developed severe neurological symptoms s alright, no vaccines.


Sorry. Here's the thing if it's a try don't want the vaccine I'd let everyone else Garrison. There's only one person that gets that out of a hundred people during the trial we got to do it when you wrap that shit up to Millions though. You got thousands and thousands of people that are backed by the way, I feel about it is I would like everyone else get it the vaccine and I because know what everyone says we need a vaccine on thinking about getting it themselves my man. Manager her dad got the Lyme disease vaccine back in the dizzy and it gave him Lyme disease cheese. Yeah, they stopped doing it. They stopped doing a lot. I think they deny that a gay people Lyme disease, but he got fucked up from this vaccine. Yeah interesting like no. It's actually a coincidence.


You actually got Lyme disease right before we gave you the Gap in you and I'm sorry. We didn't mean really sorry. I'm vaccines a creepy. I've never gotten a flu vaccine. I've never gotten the flu I want. I'm just I'm glad we brought this up. Yeah, Robert Kennedy Jr. Yeah. Crazy legit right back, sir. I grow Max her. I would take what he says and literally think about it. I've heard him speak. I mean he has a disease with his voice. What's left voice? I don't I don't know but he has like there's some very rare disease e as I believe this voice, he's just doesn't like vaccines. I mean listen, there's a lot of credible people that not where you're going to you know, not just saying all vaccines are bad.


But saying that there are real problems with certain vaccines and the amount And the amount of vaccines it the kids are getting they're getting a lot of vaccines in a very short period of time. So he was on Mike Tyson recently. Just listen to him like, you know, I my grandfather and grandmother were kind of major. Imagine. You're on Mike Tyson's hotboxing your highest fucking talking those colors. So that's how he talks. Is that Crystal either right? It's Crystal. He's found a job. Isn't it interesting that he's he's doing Mike Tyson show me I lo I watch this that the end of it.


He says he's not an anti-vaxxer. I don't think he is. I think people are think their vacations but here's the read that and thought it the thing about vaccines is like the thing about all medication and basically everything so there's a certain number of people if you make things mandatory, like if you make everyone have to take a vaccine think about there's 300 whatever million people and most of them have been vaccinated you're going to have a lot of people that have problems, right? That's just a sheer numbers issue. That's just going to be a big issue then if you look at the vaccine Court, like how many settlement and by the way, I should say right away. I'm pro-vaccine. I've been vaccinated my kid's been vaccinated right but I know people who have had problems and I know people whose children have been vaccinated who said that immediately caught Ron funches was talking about it and he's like, I don't know that's what caused it but right away my kid shut down and we noticed it like it was it was instant and we thought it would come back and never came back.


Back, he was different before and he's not the only one that I've talked to have. This is a lot of concerns about things like that happening, but they don't know if this was something that was inevitably going to happen or if the vaccines were Catalyst if it's you know, but vaccine courts have paid out money to a large number of people does that mean vaccines are bent no vaccines of the reason why most people that are Lisa R. Yeah. There is a reason why we haven't died from fucking smallpox and syphilis and all the other disease syphilis. Same for civil. I don't know if that it syphilis. I think that 4.2 billion dollars has been awarded as of October 2009 teen. Wow. It's just one of those things. I think that's where we are scenes that some Court people know so little about it and people are very uncomfortable because a lot of the scroll.


Let me see what that means. Now, you're right what's scary was breaking it down by ear. That was just like a good to the biggest. Oh overall that this is the Wikipedia for for vaccine compensation National vaccine. I've seen injury Compensation Program. That's what he was talking about. Which is what you got into. He's still he's a lawyer and he's indulge like you so fighting this fight. That's this is the thing. It's it's not that we shouldn't vaccinate because if we didn't vaccinate all these fucking kids that are getting the mumps now and measles and all these different serious diseases. I really fucked people are coming back they're coming back because people don't want to vaccinate their kids, right?


It's fucking complicated man, like most things that involve people. They're very complicated. Yeah, but I think that a lot of people are you know, because with coronavirus they are just skeptical because the whole thing has been just handled poorly and nobody knows what's going on in the information is so bad and nobody trusts anybody anymore the idea that you're just going to shove to see the acid somebody's going to shoot you in the arm with this up synthetic corundum virus people don't people are kind of that's scary sounding is synthetic coronavirus, whatever the hell you want it is, I don't know what it is. You're called mRNA. Viruses and what that is is it's vaccines rather mRNA vaccines. It's a vaccine that stimulates the production of certain proteins that will fight off the coronavirus.


Okay. So it's not like you're getting an inert version of the virus like every other vaccine so right so, okay. Well now we got a whole new fucking thing. Now. It's a whole other that's the whole new one. This is a new thing what people are just people just are uncomfortable with any All information being disseminated right now is just you know Up For Debate you have people that are screaming each other going. This is the thing. I read an article the other day that said vaccines are on their way. The next article said they'll never be a vaccine. I don't know what to think. I'm reasonably intelligent and I don't know what to think a lot of this country is not reasonably intelligent. So they don't necessarily like II don't blame them for being skeptical and being a little scared and going you know, what I'll take my chances out there instead of getting a shot in the arm in a Walgreens.


They vaccinate you in like a shitty Pharmacy, you're buying like eggs, and you get a shot and they say good luck and who's doing it? Somebody making minimum wage has no idea what they're doing like yeah. Yeah. It's a little terrifying. Yeah, I'll take my chances take my chances with coronavirus next part, which I've heard a knock to get conspiracy on this part. But like I've heard the 280 Nano getting added to RNA and vaccine stuff and that one. Yeah, I'm surprised that some problem Bill Gates. Yeah, right. We got--okay got a nano robot. I don't know what's accurate or what's not accurate boy. Nobody took a bigger hit during this coronavirus lockdown than Bill Gates.


Wow. He became a villain. I don't think he's a villain but I also think that listen we're living in a time now of Batman era villain, like we're like these guys have billions and billions and trillions of dollars. I don't think he's a villain. I'm not saying he's evil. I don't think he's a villain that I'm not saying he's gonna say but here's what's fuck Bill Gates. Has done more for Humanity then most rich people would ever imagine doing that guy's built schools and Wells and help people get educated or they look him and his his wife though, the Gates Foundation they've done a tremendous amount of positive work, but what I'm saying it half but he's waiting in to the controversial Waters of the vaccines. Listen, but what I'm saying is yeah the during this pandemic.


Yeah, he's become a villain for the first time ever. Oh, yeah. It's like seven because he wants to deliver people to Market. beast that's all that's the only reason people are upset with him and see you want to deliver people the mark of the beast was sick and I'm forever out toxin in you but listen when he goes listen, you got to expect a certain amount of a certain amount of you know discussion when you're making when you are the guy inserting yourself into this very kind of volatile debate about public health and you're telling people they need to have P vaccinated to travel and these are the standards that you want people to adapt. Listen, man. He could have just been a billionaire that they're swam as fucking pool.


Why do you think he talked about that? Like telling people that they need to be vaccinated? He I guess he if it given the benefit of Daddy's wants to help people. I guess not give him the benefit of the doubt. Okay, if we don't give the better for the doubt will say that he wants the world to look exactly like he thinks there's necessary and unnecessary things. He thinks that he should be in charge of people's Health public health or that he thinks that a group of Scientist or him and his foundation should be in charge of public health to his found. Really. No, I mean listen, there's also billions of trillions of dollars to be made of some of these vaccines does he? Is he making money on vaccine? I don't know what he's doing, but I'm telling us so much money. Why does he need more money?


Why does anyone need more money? I don't think it's doing it for money. I'm a thing as evil guy. I'm saying that we cannot write a blank check. I feel like anyone is an evil God. We cannot write a blank checks on the bottom. We can't write a blank check Joe to anyone. The next apple that's in 2015. That's when he planned it. Listen. I don't trust nobody wears an outfit this fucking sweater with this the tigers are this not being totally serious the button shirt underneath him and dr. Fouch. He created AIDS. That's all I'll say. That's all I had to say why he could, you know peeped out for the fucking walk around just for fun and they created a so, that's the only reason I'm a little skeptical no, but in all seriousness Why Society should be structured with one guy stands out because by the way in order to travel and go places and open your business is here's what you need to do.


And we talked about that in the beginning of the show, but the government doing it. Why is it better for private billionaires doing it? But here's the thing like, why are we listening to him? Talk about public health issues like yeah, but he's the guy who founded Microsoft phenomenal question. Yeah. I mean, it's a great question. Is it just because he's Rich he's an assistant. What if I stepped up and started telling everyone it's time to get vaccinated. Everyone's got to get vaccinated. Yeah. Yeah, even be like hey, hey. Hey relax, you're a fucking comedian in a cage fighting comic writer. Why are you telling everybody why I don't tell people to vote. So as he doing it. Well, that's why people are a little suspicious. He's stepping out of his late now, so that sweater with the shirt the sweater to creating a vase and Mark of the Beast all of its prop.


There was a great how many many more I've said this before in the show. You want to shoot a Miss with Dustin son to help climate change. I heard about that when you have the capability when you have the capability to do that type of shit. Someone's got it. No one's checking him. You know why checksum Bill Gates? I don't trust him. Why does he talk shit about Tesla? Oh, did he? Yeah, interesting. Well, he and human war buddies at that other fraud or above his ago. I live in my little house. I've always lived in and I drink Cokes. Yes. He's so trillionaire. He's a cold-blooded trillionaire God love them. But stop with the ab stop with that's an act. He's a military base under the house start with this fucking act. I eat Dairy Queen and all this horseshit your ab you've got Got 80 billion dollars.


Can you stop with the horseshit? He lives in a small house insurance Coca-Cola. I'm sure it's not that small small for a goes with 80 billion dollars for but that those are the guys you gotta watch. I want my billionaires and palaces like 30 teams. It's a nice little house. I want my billionaires living like Trump in a gold apartment. Well, listen, he's a cheap. Fuck you looks to keep the same house. I don't like that. What about that? Go there a sneak peek go down. Jamie collapse before huh seek? What? Is that a sneak peek? And Warren Buffett is why there's other The house is this motherfucker, whatever how many houses you got Warren his let him agates are such good friends because they're both doing this thing where they're like, we're just little old man, and I'm just saying go everybody's got to get watched.


I understand everybody's got to be watched by me. You should think that people are watching when you open your trap and tell everybody that got to get vaccinated people are not predisposed to trusting billionaires delivering them edicts. I don't want any dick. It from anybody from the government from a billion. I don't want anyone to go. Here's what you have to do. Explain to me. Why tell me why it's beneficial and then by the way even still give me the freedom to do it or not. So here's what he said about Elon and Tesla he was saying that this Tesla truck thing that building semis is not likely because of the fact that the batteries are very heavy and elon's like you don't know what the fuck you're talking about already doing. Yeah, like they're there already deep in their 500 Miles semi trucks right like they're already operation.


There are a year away from implementing them Nationwide right? Like they have them right you seen a Tesla semi. Yeah, they exist. Right? So he's talking about it's not likely playing and he's like, what is this time? This is actually all these billionaires have egos. They will fight each other. Okay. Look good. What's your opinion about Bill Gates decorations, refer to electric trucks regards. He has no clue. Yeah. He doesn't have a clue. Look Elon is balls deep into that world and then elon's also mad because Bill Gates bought a Porsche tyke an electric Porsche. Well these he said like after you see ya Bob that Bill Gates said our Ilan said I've been underwhelmed when I talk to him.


Oh, that's funny. Well, you know the whole thing is that these guys have egos and oh, yeah, everybody wants to just give me a little info you before you put a chip in my arm, please. There's a company that yeah, we were watching the video. They put chips in people's arms so they could use a vending machine. Yes. Yeah. I don't think that's good. Americans will chill go for that. Well, they fire you attorney chip off to well. They're going to do that. I mean, they're gonna do that. I mean this is this is going to happen. I mean, how did out? Yeah, they well they can deactivate you. Yeah. Sure about your choice is Tim. Yeah. Keep that chip in your arm for the rest of your life and it's just inert but what's the track you have to track you right or what Spotify shipped me on the way in which I thought was Street told me they were gonna do that.


They just get a chip in my neck. When I walked into told me they were going to do I was like, okay you'll do well they knew that you talk shit on trannies. They do they said he's only I like the Republican one. I love Caitlyn Jenner. I love if you're a transgender person. You're against gay marriage. I'm already a fan. I think I fucked up by saying tranny. Can you see that and you can't say it, even though trannies cars other trannies think gay people called gay people faggots, but you can't say that don't say it. Don't say it. You can say because you okay, yes, but if you look past I but I love I know I look too racist to say the my wife's doesn't believe you guys. She says you just doing that just for the jokes. We had a meeting. W me and they said we've got to figure something out and I said I said well, can we try and they said gay guy who's kind of like uncomfortable and probably the wrong things and and I said we pledge to try it out.


I told my wife lives in Jersey with our three kids who I sent money home to every week. She's a lovely woman slightly larger but working on it and you know, she get would just make it the money, you know, but well, it's just a gay in the media as like is gays become annoying now. Yeah, everybody everybody's annoyed because gay people like you are. Are you better be it's like shut up. Nobody wants supposed to be fun. They missed the Will and Grace gay. They become they become more or less. Right? It takes all the fun out of it. You're not supposed to take balls out of your mouth and tell people how to live. That's really the reality. That is the reality miss the Queer Eye For The Straight Guy type of game. Yeah. Well, there's a fun guy. Well the yeah because now the case of bookish and angry and and they're in antifa and they're angry and it's just like it's not fun.


It's your support. It's supposed to be a little fun a little In naughty and wrong. That's the whole fun thing about everything naughty. It's not supposed to be, you know, Norman Rockwell. Like I'm sure that you listen you could do it. You could have the family could do anything you want but part of what is fun about being gay is that it's not like a fucking you're not sitting there like we have the transgender lot. The drag queens reading to the kids. I'm like great. I don't care about that, but it looks like why are you doing that? It's horrible and not fun. Yeah. Nobody wants to read to kids in a library. Nobody. What do you think? Is half the thing is because on Twitter and social media people can say things and get like so that they make these statements and they feel like they did a good job and making that statement a lot of people it resonated with them before they get into the underinvested in being a victim.


So when gay people started to mainstream and you got marriage and got this and that there was you weren't really victim here. So then what happens people start to think we're and this and that and we're very different and now it is we don't as so now I would like a lot of these non-binary people. All due respect Spotify is that a lot of these people are white women in upper-middle-class colleges like Wesleyan and Oberlin and plan places like that who don't want to be a victim IV. They don't want to be on an oppressor. They could put their rich white chicks. So by saying I'm non-binary you're automatically now you're not in the hierarchy of impression anymore. You've been victimized by a gender patriarchy that has enforced these things on you and that might not binary it might stick.


Look great. I have no problem. I don't care but it also might be like bell bottoms like 20 years from now. I might be like, yeah, your mother had no gender in college. She was in that she's to burn down the federal courthouses in Seattle. You know, it would Douglas Murray say about nice hit repeatedly call them the really need attention people. He does he makes so many people man. He's just sitting there is just a very large and it just says, you know, Joe let me say a few things and we'll be in the news and four minutes, you know, like he's brilliant. Yeah, his book The Madness of crowds is fantastic because he nails at all. Yeah, all the the craziness is going on. But if I can every this weird generational because it's older gay people aren't don't understand this a lot of them.


Oh, no, they don't got it. Yeah. Okay. That's like Palm Springs those guys those two guys. No one took over the less serious. SLI then gay people that had money like they were all bought these buff guys walking around no masks. They took it less seriously than people that watch Infowars like they were like, this is fake. They survived HIV there but we also know about the AIDS by lifting weights. No one cares. We're not fucking taking covid. Seriously. So this whole idea they don't understand they'll be very honest to God. I don't understand to go. What do you mean gender is not real the whole point of my life isn't genders real that was attracted to that gender. Yeah. That's the whole point. Yeah, so, End of the day look what do you mean that's not real. So I'd be spending idiot forever.


I just wanted to get beat up in school and don't have to join a gym again. Pop. Click. What are we doing? That gender is not real thing is so dumb. We're late. It's like space is fake the thing you bring it the same ideas the same thing. It's sick. We're in trouble who cares? No one cares is the other thing. I think people are so invested in people hate them if people care no one cares. No one cares about your life. No one cares. You want to be a man or woman. Nobody gives a shit about anything. Nobody cares about anything truly. They care about at this line of Chick-fil-A if their water bills pay they don't give a shit about your life. But this idea that people are oppressing you in a constantly invested in their hunting in there behind the trees and they're coming for you. No one gives a shit. Yes or small motivated groups of people that want to restrict your rights, but by and large most people they might be like, oh that's weird or look that's a little odd, but they're not fuming with hatred at you.


No, no, they're not and it makes people feel powerful or Worthy. Dances. Yes. I want to be hated for the right reasons you are yes, and I believe I am I think you are I you know what I used to say I was gay on stage people would be shocked. Now. Sometimes people start clapping. You don't want that. I don't say anymore. You know what I stand sad. When I say Ruth Bader ginsburg's burning in hell was that reaction? I'd rather that reaction. I've chosen and Another way to say it, you know, it's a fun time to be bad.


Yeah the fun time to say ridiculous shit because even though like there's a lot of blowback. There's also a lot of people that get really happy that you're doing it. Yeah, not enough people that are pushing back. Do you know a lot of people aren't and the people that come out to these shows have been having so much fun because they want this is what they want. Yeah. Everybody wants somebody to push back and and do it in a funny way. Everyone can enjoy and that's what I think. We need to do and I don't want people that are free to express themselves. Yeah are not and most people are not. Yeah, most people are not and also let Harley would go in his crazy Direction. They're going into who gives a fuck. We have all the tools to just create our own thing. You've shown everyone that and it's just like people are over it. People are over what you gonna sit in the writers room and write write for some show where were see that Emmys shit horrific Jimmy Kim.


Yeah, Jimmy Kimmel and yeah, it was an Anthony Anderson. I don't know who was it that he was with. It was so weird. It's weird that they that he said yeah, that sounds good. Yeah. Yeah, you know, you're supposed to clap here. Jimmy say black lives matters is black lives matter. Say it louder Jimmy. Yeah backlight and he's like like clapping. I'm like, yeah. What are you doing did a parody I didn't know it's a hard thing that when you look at it, you're like are they make it fun of it appears? It's weird. They're trying to make it funny. Yeah, it's just there's no audience and they didn't try it out in front of an audience. And yeah. That needed work. Like I see we're trying to do this problem. Have you got some really good writers?


Yeah to do that you but you got to take some chances that there you go Anthony Anderson, Jimmy Kimmel look so uncomfortable. Like yeah, it's why I think that's part of the sketch though is that he supposed to kind of look uncomfortable. That's a part of the fun about it, but it's just not good. Nobody needed someone to write something really that yeah something someone to write something really funny. Yeah, you know and take a risk. Comedies what some of those gray areas and there's no gray areas anymore. So that's a real big problem. That's a big prize and big problem especially for anything corporate Louis made a good point. He said that when you criticize both sides you end up illustrating a deeper truth, which is about Humanity which is what comedy supposed to do.


Yeah, if you look at two sides and go this and nasty kind of try to make fun of them, you have no sacred cows or whatever you end up illustrating something deeper about Humanity which people can learn more from And then, you know reorient themselves in a productive way about any issue. Yeah, that does make sense. Yeah, and that is you have to be able to look at both sides and in this day and age that's not possible. Yeah, like you if you're unquote I should say it's not possible. If you're in a corporate television show. If you're on television if you're doing a late-night talk show like at it. You got no shot man you there's too many crimes and to the worst. I mean, they're just not funny. They're very strange. They don't look at Jimmy Fallon does not look happy.


Doing his show looks like he's chained to that desk. It's very strange. He's talking to Muppets. He's talking to Miss Piggy. There's Muppet singing on the show. It's dystopian. I'll just like they're they're running at high altitude. Yeah, I guess I'm just here in the room with that kind of money. And you say to yourself. Like I just want to be stay. I was wonder why those guys don't just jump ship and like go make a movie go do something else. They can't make movies. Yeah, because none of those guys like Jimmy Fallon, they're not going to make movies with Jimmy Fallon right now. I mean, maybe they can make a movie. But I'll make it Sunday go do something else the guys who make the movies already making the movies right? Seth Meyers are Seth Rogen rather. He's making the movies your eyes these famous guys that are you know, Adam Sandler they're making movies, right like for you to say I've never made any movies before but I've been in talk show host want to make a movie like that might work, but you got a gig that pays you fucking 10 million a year and why stick with this gig?


What are you stupid my risk it? Why risk it? Yeah and well, maybe I'll just do a podcast. Well, what are you gonna say wild shit on your podcast and then the Can't see it from your show. Then you're in trouble your podcast doesn't make enough money yet. You can't do it instantly, but nobody what's amazing these nobody leaves like Allen's back. Nobody walks away. Nobody ever taught like she's got hundreds of millions. She's got so much money, but she's back. She doesn't kiss she's back. I think she wants to redeem herself. That's probably true. Like during the covid. Nobody got she got taken down harder than Bill Gates. She danced like Bill Gates was like here. Yeah, he got taken down, but I think they'll forgive her the by the way, if you were having a problem if you You were in a car accident everything like that and you just sitting there and you want somebody to help you and you see Allen and Bill Gates.


Does that make anyone feel comfortable? No, I think that you give a fuck or be very honest like both if two of them were walking towards me and I had like a tire out I would fake my own death. I just I don't something on a guttural level I go. She dresses like an executive on West World thus waiting for you to die. Yeah watching them on the screen. Hmm. She stops man and going to shoot him. Hmm. Well, you've been diesel song into like they had the While dancing don't tell me Vin Diesel singing don't do it. This is this is very don't you do it? It's very bad the Emmys who's that for right now? I could bargain audience nobody if you're sitting at home and you're a nemi's rider like who we do is not the 27 million people.


They're about to be evicted say that that's not who it's for it is what's real to write and that one really? Yeah. I mean, they should have not had it. I think there are it's for young kids in high school that want to support one day being on 30 Rock, you know or show Uh like that create a show like that Vin Diesel, this is on Kelly Clarkson's show. Yes. She's gotta show people like they have screens flipped up vertically for the audience that she can see them and this people at home like they're doing for the NBA go. Okay, I guess Ben has a new song. And is he singing right now? No, you think he's talking to her and hopefully here for the audience. We're here. So they're showing this is a weird part where they must have told these people off to dance. Okay. Let me let me see what this is.


Give me a little bit of it stop. Stop. I heard enough Horrible. No, not as bad as Drew. Barrymore's talk show how bad was it? Everyone said it was horrible. It doesn't even make sense. What's wrong? I shan't doubts. What is it? All of it? Yeah, just I don't know like the writing the overacting. It just it's confusing man. It's like have you seen it Jamie? I throw some clip. I saw that I think he might have been Tom and Christina put up. It was like not it's so bad. It's like, how did you let that slide through like Someone is a teller. Like I've heard her on talk shows though as she said that yeah, she's nice chopping block seem smart and funny and interesting on talk shows and then doing her own.


She's like over-the-top and like really like acti Audi. Yeah, it's bad. You wanna hear a little bit of it. Here we go pair off for normally. I just thought since you were closing soon anyway, and I just think your bosses should actually know what an amazing person you are that you will simply not break the rules. But then I was curious as anyone else have her tried to find a clever way in when like the sign say no entry. So to speak. I love receiving a know after I've tried everything stop it. That's enough. Yeah, I need is a good writers are dead their old dad. And this is Gotta Die and make sure I mean at the end of the day, it's just that's why you should just like it's just like podcasts true and if she if she podcast and then just be herself.


Yeah, I think it'll be better people better be better than this soon stand up there. She's trying to be very big and animated and knowing yeah, but she hasn't done stand-up before crazy. Yeah, you doing stand-up but you haven't done stands. In other words been famous since she's to or something. That's right. So, I mean, it's like pulling what was the ET Le Chien TT that what she was on. Oh my God. She's been in the business forever so long ago. Yeah. That's so long ago. Yeah. I mean that's where it ends. So it is easy to this is a lesson for everybody in a theater arts class right now. You could be Drew Barrymore doing that show. Or Aaron Carter jerking off. Those are the two options. Just wait until you're older. Will you got to develop a personality and go through some struggle and pay your own bills?


Like I don't don't think it's right. It's like you as one of the things that I was talking with my house after the kid and I filled now there's no no I was just I was on Sesame Street three times. We really twice as I suspect you. Could you could you could get the poker with Snuffleupagus legitimately. I was a child actor and I Felix I have the same voice I do now is just Being a casting director. I'm glad I was working a little kid, but I would say I'll be like Allah when they'd be like, well, did you give up I gave I was from six first play with six 6 to 12 and then 12. That was yeah. God gave up before your puberty kicked. Yeah, and then and but I got out but I was you know, I was in that game and I was trying that you know, I would audition against people like Jonathan Taylor Thomas like real-deal dudes who made whose idea was it from dude.


I really like doing it and I was really like into it. I wanted to be you know, I wanted to tell And Shannon wanted to everything and my mother and father there, you know Boomers. They're like fine, you know, they make a little money pay our mortgage. I know what I mean there. Would Long Island scum Ball, but you know, so I have a friend who got famous when he was young and his parents ripped them off really found out later in life. They would have done that to me to they would have absolutely taken everything goes to yeah, they would have mismanaged. It didn't audit. Yeah, they would have sent through it all off both of them. So I'm glad I'm glad that it didn't work out for that sake. Because they would have taken all the money and blown it. You wouldn't have been funny. I'm glad it worked out because yeah, you gotta go through some shit.


I live you gotta live you gotta live. It's just it's the hard enough to be a person just a grown person. It's how everybody knows that it's hard. It's hard to be a grown-up. It's really hard to be famous. Right? It's hard. It's hard to manage it and it's way harder if you grow up famous. Yeah, because you never had a reality like you don't have a like real people know who I am. Now, you know, they always know who you are. Right. Well, you're fucked because it's like cement but you're mixed. You're mixing it wrong. Not too much water. It's never going to harden. You can't like take the water out. Yeah, like you already fucked. Yeah, that's what it's like to difficult to get. Your level is very difficult somebody that's really well-known. It can be very difficult. I got a my little round of fun because I get a few people in a restaurant go.


Hey, man, that's fine McKay. Yeah, you were fans. We like your pocket. That's fun. But then at your level it gets a little invasive gets It gets invasive but I have slow drip. You know, I got it over a long time, right? Yeah, but a slow Fame drip since 94, right? No. Yeah, and and then now it's just this is yeah, you can't go to an airport without people. It's a whole thing. It's a thing. Yeah. It's a thing that people come out. I'm gonna bring these two are people quote they run up to you and you're like dude. I just let me just show you this video. Well, they want me to do things with them. Yeah. That's what's weird. Like I need you to help me with this project. Let me help me with This project I'll dude you'd be amazed the fucking a number of people during the day that email me or or get ahold of friends.


Like hey, man, I don't want to get you this but this guy wants to talk to you about this. Yeah, I mean, it's hundreds. Yeah, it's constant. Yeah, because they think that they know. Hey, you know that guy. Hey, right I got this thing. I've been trying to make this new kind of pickle, right? What's your function it? Can you invest if I could just get a hold of him? My bad? No. Bullshit a thousand people ask me to invest in thing the weirdest way someone tried to get on the show has ever been like weird ways Amador. I don't know somebody FedEx himself to the studio beautiful thing about me not reading comments or anything like that as I don't have to read any of that. Right and I have good people that filter out all that shit, right?


Yeah. They've done like like Twitter campaigns tried it like yeah tweet Adam tweet out him here. He is here he is. This is makes you look at that. Look at that. I should have made it. We just had the I walk around Snuffleupagus. How did you know is Tim is that you? Yes, man. Come on Dancing with that small Hispanic woman. Are you sure that's you. That's absolutely me. How do you know that's you always I was MKUltra mind control, but I had it serapis therapists have done. I don't know what your engine bay. I want to see your little face. I looked at for now. So it's all from fucking bird's eye view premises at once shit. I'm not buying it.


Wait a minute. You can talk to him. Did I start to get chubby you could tell I was trying to get chubby his you? Yeah, so weird. What do you think of my day? Like, I'm really auntie. I was thinking that this is really not what I thought it was gonna be. Did you meet Snuffleupagus outside of the outfit or the keep that a CEO but big bird used to smoke cigarettes outside. He was just really kind of gotten in Carroll something and he looked very like who you know, like creeping like well now just mat the uterus. That's the smoking cigs and kind of like big bird smoke cigs in front of the kid. Kids. Yeah, he was sitting outside and story a cop in Astoria Studios. What year is this? 19? I was I was being a 9. So 1994 you can still smoke cigarettes in front of kids right now back then it was kids would just shut up.


We would take my friend's mother would drive us ratchet smoke pot. My friend's father was Smoke pots and roll the windows up. That's the - that's all she would smoke Marlboros not getting cold. Yeah because of you kids. Yeah, the windows go right up. So that was what you could treat kids like, you know garbage smoking. And in restaurants seem like such a thing of the past but it wasn't that fucking long ago. What year was that? I wasn't doing so must have been like two thousand and three four, five Summers Project New York was earliest the New York was first. Well la was it was a big deal because they stopped it in bars. And I remember Drew Carey was complaining. They said I don't think Drew Carey even smoked but he's just complaining for the business for Barney's Beanery because they blocked it Barney.


Everybody's like what Barney's Inari even have a smoking section was a little ridiculous because just wear my clothes everywhere everywhere. Yeah, how could have a sec? I guess the world just smelled like smoke when you when you were growing up like all the time. Yeah, but casinos you can still smoke. Yes. That's what's fucked. They have a fairly can you know, really really it's very it's frowned upon half the area you can't you could like if you're at a table. Yeah, you can have a cigarette butt like walking around most of the places like no smoke, but please notice but I think she probably don't want you dropping ashes on the floor burning the carpet. Yeah, there's a lot of assholes who walk around with cigars to a man. Hey Vegas and will fuck. Yeah, I'm gonna win that might be the casino dependent. Well, the ceilings are so high and they filter the oxygen so I mean do they really pump oxygen in there to keep you awake?


That's what they said awake but it's probably because there's it's such an enclosed space. You have to get some fresh air in there. Yeah. I'll about keep you away. Have you been since the the covid now? I've only been to Vegas for the fights and the fights are at the UFC Apex enter. Have you stayed or do you just like no I fly in and out in a day. Day, and it's weird being there man. It's like everybody's wearing a mask and they have very strict laws in Nevada. So like everybody's Mast up and yeah, I just think that that Town's gonna have a tough time back. They don't have a real tough time bouncing back. But if they are back they will make money. Yes, of course, I love Vegas about being there. It's just whether or not that the town itself though. My buddy.


Randy was telling me it's been hurting he lives there. He said certain hurting bad. He's like, it's hurting bad like most people burnt through their Rings within the first month or two and you think I like these kind of come back dude, I don't know Jamie you were just there. He said it was horrible as weird almost forgot. I was in three airports, LOL for technically, I guess La Columbus Austin while pretty empty for like you would think that pandemic is happening O'Hare Airport last night packed slammed slam people run around everywhere people full flights every play and everyone was saying was full there every flight I got on there like this is a full flight that would make me uncomfortable full flight with strangers. We're in a masculine. I haven't done a full flight, but I've done I've done flights and I got to be honest with you.


You don't feel that in the in the plane because they're the oxygens keep your they circulate. They we filter the air. They said that the transmission rates are probably lower their than if you were in like an elevator or in a closed small room, so I'm like that. It's weird how contagious is diseases. Well, you say that but I know a guy just has a positive in his girlfriend's not positive and they've been living together so weird. It's like this very strange this where you know, probably healthy. Yeah. So I mean but he's healthy to they're both both like Fitness people. She taking the old fazool. She might have been doing that. I don't know take a little while. That's it. Is that the episode is that the vaccines maybe it's in the low it might be anybody but listen this he's he was still guys come down some breast milk today the antibodies or I just take the virus.


I take the vitamin D. And and I think that's what you can do. Yeah vitamin E helps me and not even think about it. Ben C vitamin dhoni white sugar and inflammatory ice cream bullshit. Don't Journey, you know, don't don't don't, you know try to sleep. That's hard. Well, that's the thing about breast milk to though breast milk is phenomenal for a kid's immune system. Hey go make sense makes sense. But you know, it's not nearly as big of an issue with children. Anyway, the one of the things the Florida governor did is you put up a chart that showed the fatality rate for people that are you know under this age over that I actually went through all the thing which is accurate, but you're just talking about fatality the law.


Term effects are creepy. Yeah, that's about that's an issue. There's some people that have like devastating long-term effects and they don't know how long that's going to last because obviously this is only been around for six months, but there's people that got it for 5 months ago that are still suffering from fatigue and that they're also saying that like that's a lot like the lot of diseases that aren't reported like, you know, people just have some weird neurological reaction to it and it just flares up like some type of whether it's chronic fatigue or yep. I've seen bars. I mean dude, it's just a bad situation where you hope that we get out of it, but there doesn't seem to be like there's no great option here. The great option is take care of your health.


Yeah, you know make it just that's that's the option make sure you make your immune system as durable as possible. And there's this is what's driving me the most crazy about our government. You don't hear a peep about that. You don't hear a peep about that which is why you know, I was talking on my podcast. He said as a joke. I said tell people to eat their veggies like you either tell people to vote. There's so much better. Rise or equally as good advice, you know, yeah, tell them other things and nobody tells anyone anything so yet they said not a word about immune health and they've said not a word about preventive measures you can take other than sitting in your house and going broke. Yeah the crazy thing in La they're talking about schools when the schools going to open up. They said after the election I could you please try to pretend that you're not being political totally political after the election.


Do you have those I am yeah, Kamala Harris will open the school. She'll cut the ribbon to open the school when it's yeah. Do you have science? She's to smother Biden with a pillow that I mean is that he gets in that she's gotta go. They're going to celebrate the going to celebrate your hotel room and she's gonna get on top of them out. Yeah. Yeah. I've saw this in the last week. This guy's gotta go. This is a big mistake. Yeah, he's been taking that he's been saying about taking vitamin D. He says if you're deficient the the problem with that is everyone's deficient. Yeah, you know people don't think they're deficient 79 percent of America's deficient in vitamin. Yeah about but decide she just seems to me like I've always believed that In shouldn't shouldn't be doctors and I or Governor's yeah or Governor's correct whether there should make cars even a hundred percent, but I knew we should have a Jew or an Asian giving us advice.


I like that. Nobody wants a short am falchi. Nobody wants a fucking delivery guy giving people advice on coronavirus. Give us an Asian. Give us a Jew. Nobody wants an Irish guy either. Nobody wants a guy that looks like me using an analogy Kennedy. Nobody wants that. Who's Tony Hayes? You're a Jew please tell me nobody want nobody what you want a doctor or an Indian guy like a Pakistani guy something didn't listen to him. Yeah. Listen Italian guy. I like what you're saying. I'm just what it is. I think that's fair. I like when people are racist against white people. It's like entering the only it's no way with us all we have left.


Yeah, you get away with yeah. She's all over him. All you have left, you know and Italians are barely white. That's what I'm saying. Truly that's my piece or Irish. We're barely Well, we were slaves we were slaves and we were I mean the Potato Famine was a tragedy hmm people tend not to remember that although the gloss over this box need potatoes right in front of you. Yeah, right. Think about you. This was a hard time hard time for your ancestors. I mean, but I don't know this debate tomorrow's going to be like it might be the funnest thing ever. I hope and the scariest. I hope it falls apart. I hope Biden forgets what he's talking about and just fall asleep. I hope Trump goes crazy and starts making it up. Yeah, and I hope the United States the next day puts time out and say yeah.


Yeah. Yeah, let's start over wouldn't that be amazing commercial-free? It's an hour-and-a-half commercial-free. Wow, who's the moderator Chris walls? I don't let me see it. I know they've announced all things Chris Wallace to take soccer. Let me tell you something about that. Chris Wallace guy. He is very reasonable. He's not bad. He's very reasonable. He's a good choice. He will hold your fucking nuts to the fire. Stupid shit. Yeah, he's good. Yeah, and he's and he's a Fox News guy, but he's good and even liberal so looking at him the like, okay, it's going to be two he's gonna be a great. It's going to be a really crazy debate. I'm kind of I mean I'm doing this show instead of do see it but I'll see I'll watch it and I'm sure it'll be I thought you can always watch it afterwards watching afterwards just gonna be around the election is would scary to me.


We should do last year our last in 2016. You weren't in ela it but you did it end of the world podcast. Yeah. We should do something like that on November 3rd, that'd be hilarious. We should get some people in here Jamie. Who do we have on do we have anybody booked? Hold on don't tell her you wanna say anything. Don't say anything nothing. There's nothing don't say anything Jamie. There might be that I know of okay just as election damage on different. Okay, actually just don't let the fucking Spotify. People know I gotta keep the guests quiet so I can sneak them in. Yeah. Oh by the way, I'm sneaking some people in. Yeah. Oh, there's going to be some nuclear. Arms, we're going to drop the um, but yeah, let's do that.


Let's get together a few guys like maybe Normand. Yeah, maybe sure if I'm here. Yeah, why not crazy people? Yeah do it all in here. And do I hire may not Skype options might be available to someone can't we might not be in this room anymore, but then I got ideas motherfucker moving on doing shit. I'll take this to you when you're done. I'll take to help you want to rub your gonna move here, right? I might yeah, I mean I it's getting a little crazy over there. Listen. Have you move? Here I might have this available for you getting a little crazy over there good internet, you know, if you're in the red black, this is your spot. This is the this is the spot. I like it. This is like a Boston Chinese restaurant. I had to put this thing together. I mean I didn't put it together with Matt Alvarez did yeah we can make it more red.


Yeah, we had to put this thing together. Yeah, I literally decided from I like that leave it like that leave it like that is not right. That's tight. That's nice. Yeah. It's tight from from this siding. We were going to leave LA to living here, right? Tweaks squick six weeks click we were from deciding we're going to leave LA to shipping everybody moving the whole crew. Yeah, like everybody security people everybody Jamie. Yeah my family fucking we had a move all the equipment. We had a set everything up we had, you know, they had to put together this fucking room and people like yeah, I finished your hate the new scary. Yeah. Yeah.


It's a spot where I talk. Yeah. What are you give a fuck with find me? Me. Yeah, but I got plans. Yeah, I got plans for stage 2 black. I like the way you dress it the other day said folks relax. Yeah settle down settle down its not multi. Okay, it'll be okay. It's like there's a think these are sound panels. Yeah. I just thought they looked cool. Well, I appreciate that and thanks for letting me use your backyard for my pop-up shop. Whenever you want to get a hundred people have that guy for you. Yeah clear it off real quick. Yeah, I I think there's gonna be I mean there's a Velveeta room here. Yeah stand up ba.


He's still doing stand-up. I don't know what's going on. I think a lot of stuffs Austin is closed and the whole sixth street was sketched the other day. I drove down Sixth Street during the day and I was like, whoa, this looks sketchy nothing looks good right now these close-up weird and that it opens up. Does it I hear music at night downtown? Well, I heard music for sure, but I also saw a lot of like very homeless-looking Folk. Wandering around yeah, well that's going to get worse and worse and let people figure out a way to get people back to work and get people mental health care and chemical all kinds of shit. Bridget fed us he sent me a video that she took from Venice. Yeah. It's it's mine man. Really what's going on a mile straight. I mean a mile straight of tents.


Yeah, like the fucking video just keeps going and going and going and you like no. No that can't be hold on. Is it why don't know tensed Beverly. Style, you know because this people with a lot of money, right that's exactly what it is. Yeah, but then they tweet on Twitter about you know, right. I mean, it's like well, that's the chances are they have this like stupid idea of like, what's okay the right people think it's fine. It's fine. Look at this watch this. Can you watch to see that legs and jump? Yeah, this is crazy. This is crazy. If your lungs go, I'll send this to you Jamie. I'll airdrop it to you because people need to see this because a lot of people think like, oh, you're exaggerating. It's not Dana was bids bad. It's not that big a deal here young Jamie.


It's on the way to you. It's not good how it's a fairly long video. the center Eddie the this is the thing that Androids missing airdrop. Yeah, they can eat shit as long as there are drop and as long as apples better with privacy, they can eat shit. You can't put it up there. Check this out. Watch this. Let's watch how long with us. This is like a minute long video. And watch here we go. Ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten.


I'm not exaggerating Tenten Tenten Tenten Tenten Tenten Tenten Tenten Tenten Tenten Tenten and ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten ten, it goes on and on and on and on and on and on and you fast forward, it keeps going it keeps going like this is a long fucking video. It's more than a minute long and it's just All tense, it's crazy. And that's just some of it that's just some of it. Yeah, there's there's there's real bad problems. And there's no good ways to solve them right next to that. Nobody knows how to fit. Well, they're doing this dumb shit like putting Boulders under the things and they're the are you can't do that. You just going to make the move and then they're going to be right somewhere else with a tent.


I guess you fix it Mental Health Care. The problem is they keep trying to build this low-cost housing, but it's I think it's like seven hundred forty thousand dollars per unit of low-cost housing. Why is it costing that much it so much regulation and red tape and they won't let him do drugs there. So they leave Eve right and if you don't if you don't make it illegal for them to just have tents on fucking sidewalk so you can't walk around. Yeah, you gotta walk on the highway because I fucking tents everywhere. What about mental health care that but that's still a long play. That's not going to fix anything overnight. Would you say shoot him kill him that what you just said. Well, I mean, that's a Health Care Clinic that they would walk into thinking. It's a clinic and then you would vaporize I don't know what's going to fix it. But I don't know either. I think it's one of those things where it got too far went too far.


It went it's too far gone. Like they didn't like didn't have a few tents and they said hey folks, what's wrong? Can we help let's let's let's put together a program to help these people. Yeah, and then covid came along and everything like magnified by 10. Yeah, the system seems to be buckling in certain places. And that's one of the places it seems to be buckling. The most noticeably is in Los Angeles and is the P. It has money or just like Fargo mother out of it. They're just completely, you know, I suppose in the hands of this book some guy The Hamptons he had no idea what was going on. He said to me he's like Arnold your problems on Either these real problems. I'm like, no, they're real problem. But they're out. They're out to lunch. You know people people that are just insulated by their own, you know, Social Circle or wherever they are.


But I mean, you know these these problems whether it's the fire is the exit the economy the homeless people there all it's the perfect storm and Los Angeles is just in deep deep trouble and they're not opening up anytime soon. It's going so poorly managed very poorly me. I didn't realize how important it is to have a good mayor until I saw this shit out, right and a good Governor. Well if Want to feel better about Los Angeles go right over to New York City and Bill de Blasio has destroyed 15 years of progress in five months. It really has. Yeah. Absolutely that City right now at night does not feel fun to walk around and tell me what it was like, well it was weird. We had an Airbnb mean the dude who opens for me.


We were we had an Airbnb we a beautiful apartment on like but but it was in Hell's Kitchen right by Times Square, but we're in one of those high-rises I said, you know, we're we're all the way up, you know and Then the Uber we got an Uber that was a Hazmat. It was it was wrapped in you know, literally thought that guy was in a hazmat suit in the Uber. The Uber was like cellophane wrapped like, you know to partition we choose from 12 Monkeys. Remember that movie is yes, that's exactly what are some and then he dropped us off two blocks from the Uber and you know, he had a camera were filming stuff and the walk from The Uber to the apartment was I never felt that way in New York. I mean it was pretty wild like you're looking at stuff and you'll go on like this is teetering on on a real big problem like There's just people out in the streets.


Now, you know, if you were a tourist you would not be. Yeah, that's our Uber driver if you were a tourist or if you were somebody visiting the city, it would not be a place. He would feel comfortable or safe. They defunded the police public a hundred million dollars taking money away and they're gonna have less cops and then instead of trying to figure out and solve some of these problems are just trying to like again they want to win on Twitter. They want to win the war on to it. Right? It's like that's what Hillary Clinton should try to win the election on Twitter. That was a big thing like these even the progressives are attacking de Blasio. Will they hate him, too? Everybody hates. He's across the board confident and competent eats pizza with a fork. Yes, and nobody trusts him and he's just a he's an empty-headed goon. Yeah.


That's a that's a good way to describe. Yeah. Yeah, there's no de Blasio fans. Now. It's a dark time for New York City and I don't know how it bounces, but I don't know who's right James altucher or Jerry Seinfeld, but that was amusing their balls along because they are neither one of them are living in New York city. So Jerry Seinfeld has a trillion dollar home in the Hampton and he's out too. As in Florida selling God Only Knows survivalist kids out of his basement and I like him but you know these I don't I think it just Ebbs and flows. I think it's a cycle. I think you're in for some years of Darkness re likes it good the artist you're gonna move in, right? Yeah, the all who you're sitting is regretting. Yeah, who the artists to tick tock? ER? I mean joggers are moving to the integral over.


Yeah. That's what we need really punk rockers. Yeah not I think that's possible that it happens in a few years things get bad over the runt right lower the rats the artist command. You know people and then maybe you know, listen, then you see like architect start taking big chances again because the rents are cheaper, they start building cool buildings Reinventing public spaces. There's some type of Renaissance. I mean look after World War Two we had a real big boom. The fence is gonna need a Giuliani. Well, then you're going to need somebody someone gonna need somebody so they'll Allah is going to need some guy who comes in and puts his fucking foot and it'll have to get really bad before that. You know when Giuliana got elected. I think it was in the in 1990. There was like 29 or three thousand homicides in Manhattan. That's a big deal for 20. Or 3000 this is no it was it was pretty 900 or 3000.


There's no is literally Lucy was it was almost three thousand homicides and and then we got it down to like four or five hundred a year. That's a massive difference in the amount of people getting killed yet maimed and shot and all these other crimes. Well the feeling of Times Square, I remember it from back in those days. It was weird. Yeah, it'd be like this is sketchy. Like let's get out of here. Now. It's like yeah, it was like a mall and Giuliani because he did a great job, but he'd because he's kind of a little bit of a cretin and a Out of people forgot how bad it was. They don't they don't give them any of the credit for that. They say all the credits to go to somebody else. But the reality was it was a lot of the new initiatives that he kind of brought forward. Well, here's the thing as much as you like to think progressively and be a person who's open-minded and that's who I am.


Yeah, you need Law and Order you do you need is you fucking need it. You need a new signings. We need a society need punishment for people break those rules. We need to have a society. Otherwise we have nothing else. That's why I deal with the amount of people that Glorify or excuse random acts of violence against people and private property in the pursuit of a political aim to me is the creates that that is a single craziest development in my life. I'm 35. Then I have seen that the media and even political figures excuse random violence to cast against innocent people and their property in service of an overall political points. That is crazy CNN. Yes Cuomo. Yeah since when does the protests have to be peaceful?


That's Crazy, that is a crazy thing outside. You think that's what it someone got scripts that for him someone. I don't know. I don't know but I don't think it's scripted. I think he has a mind virus. I think he's sick. I think they're all sick and something's eating their brains. We drop one of those and I think they all think that when the revolution or whatever happens they want to be this. I want to be the good white guy who said go out there and bring it all down. I'm your friend right remember me? No, I'm a rich white guy and you don't like them. I told you to burn it down. We're good, right? We're not they're gonna get you to your their enemy to dummy. You know, what they are.


Remember that video where this is kids in the in the house and they're watching these people march by and they give it a thumbs up people start throwing rocks at the window. We agree with you. Hey, I'm on your side. That's exactly what when you unleash chaos. You you're inviting chaos. Yes. There's no way to contain it. I think the Cuomo's of the world and all of those people are trying to Marshal the forces that They're opening up a comedian friend of mine Ian has Papa said it because they're opening up the gates of hell. They're opening up the gates of hell and then they're trying to like instruct everybody where to go and how bad the fires are going to get as a dude. When you open up those Gates. You have no idea. What's going to happen November 3rd. We'll talk. Let's go. Let's make it happen. Let's go Tim Dylan ladies and gentlemen kill follow him on Twitter and the Instagram.


What is it Tim? J. Dilla material and D IL Allah on Instagram and Twitter where I think we should all be spending more time. Whoo. Thanks, brother. I appreciate you by everybody. Thank you friends for tuning into the show. And thank you to Harry's and they're fucking awesome blades. You can get hairy sharpest blades ever at Big Box drug and grocery stores near you just head over to the grooming aisle. And if you like to shop online Harry's has a great offer for listeners of this show new US customers can redeem a Harry's trial set at harrys.com Rogan you get a five blade razor featuring their new sharper blades awaited handle foaming.


Gel with a low and a travel cover to protect your new blade when you're on the go just head over to harrys.com Rogan and redeem your trial offer today. Thank you. Also to expressvpn expressvpn lets you stream in HD. No problem and you can do it from all over the world. When you change your location Open the app select a location tap one button to connect and refresh the page to access thousands of Of new shows and movies go to expressvpn.com Rogan to get an extra three months of expressvpn for free.


That's expressvpn.com / Rogan. It's awesome. And it also lets you surf the web safely and anonymously. Thank you. Also to whoop my all-time favorite Fitness tracker. I'm wearing it right now. I wear it every day. It gives you all kinds of amazing. Insight on how well your body is handling training sleep and all sorts of other things and whoop is going to hook you up with a sweet deal. They're going to give you 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout go to whoop. That's wh oop.com enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15% get to know yourself on a deeper level unlock yourself with whoop, and thank you also to Roca they make dope.


Asses and they also make fucking fantastic prescription glasses. Okay, and JRE listeners are going to get 20% off with the code Rogan at checkout. So go to Roca. That's our oh, okay a.com and check them out enter the code Rogan for 20% off check these guys out the right here in Austin, Texas and they're fucking glasses and their eyeglasses and all the products are in fact the shit. All right. We did it. Thank you friends much. Love to you all. Bye. Bye.