
Hello friends, welcome to the program this episode of the podcast is brought to you by whoop. Whoop is a 24 hour seven day a week Fitness. Trap that I wear I wear on my wrist is the best fucking Fitness tracker I've ever used in my life. It gives you a shitload of data and it's processed through this algorithm with this wonderful application and it gives you all sorts of real-time feedback real source of actionable information that you can use to improve. The quality of your experience here on planet Earth. It gives you personalized insight to your body's recovery strain and sleep and it's just phenomenal it lets, you know, when your bodies recovered or when it needs rest, I check my fitness tracker.


I check my application my whoop app every morning to see how well I've recovered through the night you get to know how much stress your body should take on for working out and how strenuous your day was, you know exactly how much sleep you got and how much sleep you're going to need the The Insight that whoop provides is next level again. It's the best fitness tracker I've ever used and it can tell you how behaviors like taking CBD or drinking caffeine or alcohol or certain diets can impact your sleep and Recovery in a way that's personalized to you. So you can understand how to better optimize your behaviors. I love it. And for anybody who's looking to build healthier smarter habits.


Whoop is a no-brainer and listeners this podcast are going to get hooked up Loop is going to offer you 15% And off with the code Rogan at checkout, so go to whoop. That's wh oop.com enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15% get to know yourself on a deeper level unlock yourself with whoop. We're also brought to you by the only jeans that I wear rev Town jeans rev town has created the Holy Grail of genes. They fucking nailed it. They have the perfect amount of stretch and they fit you like sweatpants. Yoga pants, but they look and feel like dope world-class designer jeans.


They have partnered with this old school denim designer in Milan Italy to create jeans that look and fit amazing, but feel like you're wearing a pair of sweats or yoga pants like Jamie, where's everyday them yoga pants you kidding. Listen, rib town was created by a couple guys who started Under Armour so they know about stretchy scientific fiber shit for making world-class. Workout clothes and leggings and other gears look they're the best they fit so fucking good. And if you know me, I'm built like a chimp. I got short legs and their wide as fuck and they rub in the center's and regular jeans. Don't fit me good. I they bind up but these things fit perfect and it's no wonder why the fastest-growing denim brand in the world for men and women and it's 79 bucks a pair.


They're less than half. The price of some of the so-called designer jeans that we've been jamming our junk in. To four years. They're awesome. Pick up a pair at Reve Town.com Rogan. They've got something special for you guys listening right now. You can check them out head over to rev Town Ari VT o WN rev Town.com Rogan and bonus rev town is now shipping internationally so you can get them delivered to your doorstep no matter where you live. So that's rev Town.com Rogan go there to upgrade your denim game today. Whoo. We're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app the cash app.


The number one app in finance in the known universe and you probably already know because you listened as podcast the cash app is the easiest way to send money between your friends and family without having to pass off paper that dirty paper you would going to give an envelope that's nonsense. That's a thing of the past with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even Even bi-weekly. It's known in the industry as stacking SATs SATs is short for Satoshi. Who is this legendary person who created bitcoin nobody even knows who that is. But we do know what Bitcoin is Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority.


It's essentially the Utopia of currency. And of course when you download the cash app and you enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word, you will receive ten dollars in the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend. Justin wrens fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo and we're very proud to be a part of this program through it. They have raised a fuckload of money and built several Wells. They're in the process of building more right now as we speak. So do not forget use the promo code Joe Rogan. One word when you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today, you get 10 bucks and 10 bucks goes to and amazing cause we're also brought to you by Simply Safe Simply.


Save is home security done correctly. They've got everything you need to protect your home with none of the drawbacks of traditional home security. It's got an arsenal of sensors and cameras to blanket every room window and door Taylor. Specifically for your home Simply Safe has professional monitoring that keeps watch day and night ready to send police fire or medical professionals. If there's an emergency, you can set it up yourself and under an hour just peel and stick the sensors exactly where you need them. No technician required and there's no contract. No pushy sales guys. No hidden fees.


No fine print and this all starts at just 15 bucks a month. Come on. I'm not the only one saying Simply Save is awesome the US News and World Report named simply safety best overall home security of 2020. So go to Simply Save that's SI MPL is a fe Simply Save.com Rogan and get a free HD camera for the listeners of this podcast. That's simply save.com Rogan go there to make sure that they know that we sent you my friends. Okay. Whoo, we got a good one today. This is a really interesting one today joining us.


Well one person in person and one person via Skype first time ever my great friend the powerful Graham Hancock is joining us via Skype from England and he wrote the foreword for this man. Brian Maura rescues book, which is absolutely fantastic. This was an amazing conversation. The book is called the immortality. He the secret history of the religion with no name and it is all about the use of psychedelics in ancient civilizations. And with new information that Brian has been working on for over the past 12 years to create this book and he's a legit scholar.


I mean, this is in fact, he is never even had personal psychedelic experiences. This is all just based on on history and on research and it was just an absolutely amazing. ation that I enjoyed every second of so, please welcome Graham Hancock and Brian Moreau rescue The Joe Rogan Experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night. I'll get it. Joining us by Skype is the Great and Powerful Graham Hancock my friend. How are you, sir? Hi Joe. It's really good to be back with you. I wish I could be there in person feels very strange to be on this this technology.


But these are the times we live in yeah. Well, I'm just happy we could talk at all in this thing native. It's the little things like little victories and Brian. I'm going to try it. I'm going to try it Maura rescue you nailed it, bro. Thank you. And your but this is the first time we've ever done one of these as well in the studio where one may be ever visual we've never done what we did one with you guys. We remember we did Randall Carlson and mud bog defined came in by telephone. Yes, which is very strange was like sound coming from nowhere. At least I can see you but we've never done one of these like this, but this book tell me this is the immortality key the secret of the secret history of religion.


Of the religion with no name. I'll say it again the secret history of the religion with no name. Now. This is obviously when I found out the subject matter Graham, this is right up your alley and yeah, it made total complete sense while you and Brian work together on this. So who wants to start and explain what Grandma will you have you start since you're you know, you're over there in the UK. Yeah. Absolutely. Well, I mean for me I in fact Joe, I think you and I originally got in touch because Of my interest in psychedelics in human culture and a book that I published in 2006 called Supernatural. Yes, which which looks at the huge role that psychedelics have played in cultures and in religions all around the world and I touched in that book on the role of psychedelics in the origins of Christianity, which of course is a dynamite subject and what Brian has done in the immortality key.


He has been to present hard and fast evidence that the first Christians were using psychedelics and that their religious experiences were mediated by psychedelic experiences and Brian. How did you get involved in this? It's a long story. You look like a Stoner by the way. I've done a few mushrooms in his day oddly enough. I don't do drugs and I've got all I've never done psychedelics. Wow, that's crazy. Yeah, we want to start today. Well, I wish we were in La I could hook you up. Texas little it's the laws are sketchier here. What what led you to this then I was fascinated by grams work, which I only came across about 12 years ago.


I was a Latin Greek and Sanskrit undergrad major and instead of getting the PHD or becoming a priest which might the two options when you study Latin and Greek I went to law school instead for no reason whatsoever and then wound up at a law firm and a couple years in To it started reading about these psilocybin studies coming out of Hopkins and NYU and that amazing statistic that two-thirds of the participants were describing it as one of the most amazing experiences of their lives and it hit me that there was something there because the testimony coming out of Hopkins and NYU and a very clinical setting immediately reminded me of what I heard about the lusus and for those who don't know what a loose is.


It's essentially the spiritual capital of the ancient world. It was where the best and brightest of Athens. Rome went to essentially meet a goddess in the flesh and have this mind-blowing Visionary experience. So before Jerusalem before Rome before Mecha, there was a lusus and for some reason we're not taught about this in our high school mythology or Western Civ classes, but it was there that Plato Cicero Marcus Aurelius all went to drink a magical potion. And in their words have this Vision what Plato calls a blessed sight and vision the holiest of mysteries in which they claim to have a Encounter with the goddess and completely eradicate their fear of death was very similar to what the volunteers are saying with their single experience of psilocybin.


Now with elusive how much history do we have how much recorded history that documents these rituals? And is there any that describes the actual contents of this mixture now, there isn't much I mean a loose I say a loose is like the Fight Club of the ancient world. The first rule about a lusus is you don't talk about a Louis's, you know, all we have is this fragmentary Testimony again from Plato pindar Sophocles and others they do talk about a vision that's almost Universal and they almost universally talked about this once-in-a-lifetime transformative event where they become initiates and only they properly have life after death because at the time the Greeks didn't really look forward to the afterlife. In fact, there was no afterlife you just disappear into Hades to do God knows what but people walk away from a lusus saying that they'd found salvation and we don't know why or how we know this post.


Involved we know they make this pilgrimage 13 miles from Athens to a lusus to drink this potion. We know they they prepare for months if not years before it and there forever changed afterwards, but we have very little hard data to actually look into it. And so in 1978 this this Trio of Renegades Gordon Wasson Albert Hoffman who discovered LSD and call Ruck who was then the chair of the classics department at Boston University. They put out this book The Road to a lusus claiming they'd found the secret. It after 2,000 years of what they claimed is that this potion was actually spiked with ergot which is that naturally occurring fungus from which you can synthesize LSD. And in fact, it's where Albert it's how he synthesized LSD by accident in 1938 with cultures of Urgot.


We've talked about Urgot before in this podcast connecting it to the Salem Witch Trials, which is very speculative, but they think there's real evidence that shows that there was a late Frost during the time of the Salem witch trials that probably led to mold growth on their way. Which probably led to ergot infestation of their food and so these poor people where you know, unintentionally eating acid content. Yeah. It happened a lot. There were ergot outbreaks across time, especially in the Middle Ages. They would call it st. Anthony's fire the igneous Sokka because it's so so common. In fact, if you talk to any brewer today, at least for the Brewers that I was talking to I went to see this beer scientist and Munich Germany Martin's on cow, and he says, You can't avoid it now its more common on things like Rai, but it also pops up on barley and wheat to and again it's unavoidable and it's highly highly toxic.


The question is does it really produce the kind of vision the Visionary experiences that people have on psilocybin LSD mescaline and others according to Albert Hoffman. Absolutely. So as a matter of fact, I went into the Harvard archives where Watson's papers are kept to this day in the botany libraries, and I found a letter that Albert wrote Gordon his co-author in 1976. Saying that Albert had self experimented with with ergon Avene, which is one of these alkaloids and are got and he claimed in 1976. It was five to ten times more potent than psilocybin. Well, it's fascinating to me that these cultures seem to have hid some of these rituals and this goes back to really it as far back as we have recorded psychedelic use like Soma we still to this day don't know what that is.


As and it's described in these incredible ways in the ancient Hindu texts, but we don't know what it is. We have an idea actually brought some Sanskrit to show you. You know, you want to see some Sanskrit. Oh, yeah, you put it up on the screen. It's under the soumitab. I'll look at how beautiful that is. There. It is. I their language writing it in Sanskrit God. It's so pretty. You want me to read it for you, please you can read that. Yeah. So this was my major in college. So at the in the very middle there you can see Imam Mindy. Gashira lava, she rachana picture up Katya Varsity his Altima and what he's saying there is this is from the rig Veda, right? And it's the oldest literature in western civilization.


We think it's a among the Indo-European languages. It's the oldest recorded literature that we have. It could be 1500 BC 1700 perhaps much earlier like The Iliad and the Odyssey and Greek. This is the mother tongue of all the Indo-European languages and what they write about a lot is soma Which is both a God and the juice that is pressed from this God and what they're talking about. There is is making this ritual potion very much like the kooky on that. We find among the ancient Greeks and here Soma is described as a mixed potion. You have Ishida means mixed with barley. Gov Ashera from Sanskrit go guava is milk mixed with milk. And so I've read all the theories that you have about what Soma was whether it was the Amanita.


Muscaria mushroom or some psilocybin containing species or DMT the way they describe Soma here is always a mixed potion which so in this case mixed with barley and milk. So that would be an ergot some sort of already there mentioned. I mean and so that that's that's what rock Hoffman and wasum were saying in 1978. We have we have literature from the the 7th Century BC. It's called the hymn to Demeter where they record these ingredients of what the cookie on was you asked like what where is the actual evidence? In the 70s we didn't have much it starts with the literature which is what classes is due. And so there's this hymn to Demeter that was discovered in 1777 a year after we declare our independence from Graham's people and what they what they found in their in line Sorry granny.


We're in Texas man. Absolutely. Well done. I'm all for Independence. I'd like I'd like to be independent of my own country as possible. As long or Texas has taken refugees at the moment. Is it not? Well, that's what's happening here. That's why we're here. We're refugees from the country of California exactly this this nation state of California. So why do we know why they combined it with milk and it wasn't just so that it was easier to consume that that that's what we don't know. We don't know why the kooky on was it was this mixed thing either but so in the hymn to Demeter the record these ingredients, it's I'll fee which is barley who daughter which is water and a black hole.


Which means mint and that's all we have so there doesn't say milk. You didn't say milk that was in Soma unsold. Yeah. Oh, I'm sorry, which they mix with all kinds of things and not just and not just barley and Millet, but also honey, as a matter of fact Soma is often identified with mud do which is honey in Sanskrit McKenna speculated that there was a there was a transfer in culture of psychedelic based culture to an alcohol-based culture based on climate change and also based on On preserving things in Honey and that honey would create Mead and Mead which if people don't know is an alcohol beverage that's actually made with honey.


Mmm-hmm is do you think that this was the case with the use of honey as well that is used as a preservative or was it used to make it taste better more palatable? We don't know. We don't know that that's the problem. We're talking about ancient plants and fungi plants. Especially we don't know what plans. Talking about so the ancient literature records all kinds of plants across the device if I could if I could jump in Joe, you're absolutely right. There was secrecy that surrounded the uses of these potions in the ancient world. There's a case from from Athens of the potion from malluci's being used for recreational purposes.


And this is roundly condemned by all concerned that it should only be used for the for the sacred and spiritual purposes of which it was intended. So there was a great deal of secrecy that surrounded the use of these potions and the potions were doorway or a Gateway into another level of reality and what's fascinating from a losses and many other ancient accounts is the way that people come back having lost their fear of death that they don't regard death as the end anymore. It's just another stage on the journey just the beginning of the next great adventure and and its brand is absolutely right to draw attention to the The modern work with psilocybin.


And again, we find people who are terminal cases who are imminently facing death losing their fear of death as a result of using psilocybin so we can begin to see connections between what we understand about these extraordinary substances in the modern world and how the ancient world used them that does seem to be a universal theme this theme of alleviating the fear of death and this this this comes up constantly with people that That I know personally that have had it had these psychedelic experiences. They say why I feel like I went to heaven our feel like now I understand why people believe there's this perfect afterlife that I've I see a lot of a lot of the critics will say that it's some kind of natural human tendency that we don't want to die and that we are afraid of death and that and that religions provide us with some sort of Solace some some sort of feeling of security, but I don't think that washes at all.


I think it's I think what's striking about the psychedelics is it's a direct experience that the person has they have an experience is not a teaching. It's not something that they're told about is not a scripture that they read as an experience that they have and that experience eliminates the the fear of death. I think Brian by the way having written the immortality key for which I've only provided the forward. I think Brian is absolutely right to be a psychedelic virgin. In my case because I have used psychedelics and many other substances a lot of my critics just try to write off all my work whether it's on Lost civilizations or on psychedelics. They tried to ride it all off as the rantings of a sort of drug-fueled maniac and I think it's very smart of Brian very smarter Brian not to put himself in that situation.


I hope he will work with psychedelics in the future, but I think he was right not to work with psychedelics before writing this book and to concentrate on the evidence. Well, Michael Pollan who later in life experienced psychedelics and wrote pretty brilliantly about them for me that it's he's one of the more interesting people to discuss it because Michaels an investigative journalist, he he dot takes deep dives into these subjects and his Deep dive into psychedelics was incredibly Illuminating. And so when him I really enjoyed talking to him about it, and I really enjoyed his book as Well, his perceptions of it were really unique because you're talking about a guy who lived his whole life without them, you know, and then really Dove headfirst for his book and it concluded what happened kind of what happened to me when I when I read Supernatural I had I had a pot from one experience with LSD in 1974.


I hadn't used any psychedelics until I began to research Supernatural back in the early 2000s and because I'm a kind of boots on the ground researcher. I felt it was essential that Have these experiences what I couldn't guess was the way that the experiences would utterly change and transform my life and I can understand from a level of personal experience why psychedelics do lie at the root? I think of all the world's religions and those religions are now busily at work trying to deny that connection. Well, they're not just trying to do it. So there's many people in science that are trying to deny these connections to and it's so unfortunate that the people that are trying to deny Why these connections or the significance of these experiences haven't had them?


I don't think anybody who has a dimethyltryptamine experience can just dismiss it as being though. No big deal. It's too crazy the and you need to do it sir. This guy was just the fact that it's one of those things where everyone who does it comes out of it saying I can't believe that's real. Yeah. I can't I can't believe you can just get there that quickly that Three Puffs and all of a sudden you're in Narnia. I just I can't and world not way more intense and Narnia what it did Nani and you're in a place where entities are actually communicating with you and View and teaching to I mean, this is another aspect of psychedelics is the moral aspect of psychedelics critics and enemies of psychedelics want to associate them with some kind of immorality, but actually anybody who's worked extensively with psychedelics will know that they contain moral teachings whether it's the Rooms or whether it's LSD.


They cause us to examine our own behavior our own impact upon others to question our unkindness to others and to give us at least the push to to begin to be better people and more nurturing and more caring people for others. So this strong moral element in psychedelics again is totally ignored by the critics who just want to demonize these substances for reasons that I think are rather Sinister actually why I think our current culture laps and lacks a map of the territory and if we had like some sort of legitimate psychedelic counseling where we could go somewhere and experts both in Pharmacology and in medical science can talk people through these experiences and help them achieve them and and get people to realize that you know much like the Ancients these experiences are not that's not wise to use them recreationally me, you know if you can if you want I mean You will benefit many people have and then inadvertently benefited from them greatly, but I think they're very profound and I think they should be treated like almost like you've got a Willy Wonka golden ticket to go meet God because that's what it seems like it seems like it's happened was for the engine should be should be treated with respect.


Yeah should be treated with respect and with and with reverence because because of this sense that we're passing through a doorway into a seamlessly convincing parallel. Ality and the possibility that that isn't just a concoction of our brains that the brains are simply acting as an interface or a transceiver between us and that other level of reality and again, you can see the connection with psychedelics and religion here my view is and I've said this before on your show Joe if I were running the world anybody who wanted to be a president a prime minister a head of state of any kind. I think it should be obligatory that they have at least a dozen.


In sessions with a powerful psychedelic. It can be DMT. It can be Ayahuasca. It can be LSD, but they got to go through those dozen sessions. They should be guided by experienced practitioners. And at the end of those doesn't sessions. I very much doubt of those individuals would be the same individuals who went into the application for the job in the first place. No, I don't think you could be the same when when you write about all this how curious are you personally of the experience? And do you plan on having it? I do under the conditions that That you said I mean, I think that we're in a period now where everything is about to change the clinical research is advancing Rick doblin is moving to phase 3 you have researchers at Hopkins NYU now UCLA looking at psilocybin for a host of different conditions from depression anxiety end-of-life distress, which is really fascinating and I think that sometime over the next five years the FDA is going to get involved and these will become available at least for specified conditions.


And what I look forward to is maybe in 10 years time. I'm or less these Retreat centers which are licensed and regulated with professional staff and medical supervise staff who essentially guide people through what would be a novel initiation experience? Not not unlike what may have happened 2700 years ago. I'm hoping they're going to be backdoored in as therapy for people with pre-existing conditions that we have right now, like opioid addiction iboga, like ibogaine being introduced and MDMA for people with post-traumatic stress. Stress disorder for soldiers because there's been so much real solid evidence that it's incredibly beneficial to these people particularly the opioid crisis mean we have a real problem in this country with people being addicted to these pills and then wind up dying from them that can be nipped in the bud like really effectively with ibogaine and the fact that you have to leave the country to have these ibogaine experiences is really it's it's a terrible statement.


And on the the rational thinking of our culture today because it's not like these are unknown things. We're talking about it right now in a podcast that millions of people are listening to and we've talked about it dozens of times in the past and it's something that scientists are aware of researchers aware of and particularly people who have come back from there and have had these experiences and have been cured of their their addictions. They literally rewires the way the brain interfaces with these opioids and the fact that it's not available. The people and they have to go through traditional counseling and just and and benefit from their willpower and somehow or another try not to relapse. It's terrible. We're leaving just mitigating some of them even cannabis for example, which can be which can which can mitigate some of those addictive potentials.


Yeah. I worked I worked with athletes for example, which might interest you. So I represented a guy named Mike James who was an NFL player who we believe is the first professional athlete in the u.s. To seek a therapeutic use exemption from the NFL to get off his opioids and use cannabis instead and we were there at 51st and Park Avenue at NFL Headquarters arbitrating with the NFL to try and get him a Canada Supply and he lost and he was fine six figures in the process and he left early because of it. He's not the first one right wasn't there was a who's the other Jamie? You're a football fan. Who's the other famous football player? Couldn't kick the weed Ricky Williams. That's right. Ricky Williams. He never thought a Tue though.


It was Unthinkable to get it to UE at the time, but Amazing that the NFL would have a problem with marijuana when so many of those guys are on pills. I mean some of these guys are so severely injured. I mean, it is one of the most brutal if not the most brutal sport in the world and the fact that these guys can't seek marijuana for Relief when they allow them to take opioids. It's just bananas doesn't mean it doesn't make any sense because we live in an insane society, which is got all its priorities upside down. And and is completely screwing up this beautiful world that human beings have been gifted by the by the universe and I think it boils down to a relatively few a relatively few people.


We just have incredibly bad government's lousy leaders, totally irresponsible lacking any initiative or imagination in it entirely for themselves. It's a it's a messed up world and it's a kind of litmus test for how messed up that world is that Sovereign adults cannot take the responsible decision. In to use psychedelics without risking jail. That's it. It's a simple as very very insane that that should be the case and yet alcohol is glorified in our society as you say the opioids are prescribed hand over fist by by big Pharma. We're very mixed up and and I have a feeling that the sooner we get our politicians on two major psychedelics.


The better things are going to be well, let's see we got to get the whole world involved as well. We don't want to be the only ones that are tripping no problem the Chinese and the Russians are not tripping and we are really giving me fine man. Yeah, and also the other the other point to make again the critics tried to trick try to trivialize this but actually working with psychedelics is really it can be really hard work. It can be really grueling. It can be really demanding it can put you through the psychological ringer as you confront your own dark side and learn how to deal with it. Yes. There is a there is a recreational role for these substances and I honor the right of sovereign adults to use them for recreational purposes if they wish to do so, but it's the Deep work that these psychedelics require us to do which is which is really fascinating and which is not easy.


It's very very very difficult. I personally find it difficult. I don't rush to my next psychedelic Adventure. I prepare myself very very carefully and with some trip to makes variance. And those experie is what they're real or not experiences of fact you variance does. Yeah, you're breaking up a little bit there. But yeah, I completely agree with you about that. I mean I get terrified when I take an edible marijuana edibles, the the introspective nature of those things in the way, it breaks down your thoughts and your behavior and find skeletons in your closet, but I hear in that first six hours searching around a flashlight.


Tell people that with that's one of the things that I like about it, I learned things. I know it's scary. I know I feel terrifying while it's happening. But when I come out of it on the other end, I genuinely feel like I'm a better person like I've gone I've at that moment. I will I will be nicer to you. I'm better. I'm better at being me, you know, it's very effective. It really works. There's something to it and it's it's it's available. It's not something that you have to you know, go to for years and years and it snowed right there. You get it real quick. This is the whole point of the Mysteries but in the ancient world, I mean so there was a whole apparatus dedicated to curating these experiences for people and sometimes it was once-in-a-lifetime like at a losses at some later point in your life.


And then you have the dionysian Mysteries which are a bit weirder and a bit crazier, but they were also curated by professionals by technicians women in this case who were thought to be spiking wine with all kinds of magical plants herbs. And fungi, but the the Mysteries exist at to create this experience of death and rebirth and they're supposed to be terrifying you were supposed to enter the underworld to meet the goddess. It doesn't happen in the daylight. It doesn't happen prancing around and the Greeks are known for lots of great things that we've inherited like democracy and the Arts and the sciences and what we're doing right now this this three yellow goes through these microphone us. These are all Greek things and Greek technology that we've accept it as part and parcel of Western Civilization.


But there was another part to them and it's a part again that is not taught in high school mythology or Western Civ and there's this deeply mystical aspect in the mysteries. For example, which which the Greeks really looked to as something that wasn't just like a special part of civilization, but the the central part of it, so there is this I'll tell you a story about this this fourth Century historians awesomest. He records the testimony of a Roman guy named pyke text artists who was initiated at elusive because I remember it wasn't As people from Greece it was around the Greek Empire including at that time or people who've been influenced by the Greeks and the loosest has survived up until the fourth Century ad at which point it is.


It's destroyed. It's eliminated by the Christian. I like by Christians. Yeah by the christianized Roman Empire in the late fourth century. And so there were there were different attempts to wipe it off the map and in 364 the emperor valentinian essentially Outlaws all nocturnal celebrations because these things are Are always at night the loosest was at night which speaks to part of the experience and this guy practiced at this is recorded as saying valentinian. Please don't shut this down. I'm an initiate. I've been to a lusus. I've drunk the potion. I've seen the goddess, please do not eliminate. This hallucis is the one thing that holds the entire human race together. He said he said if you get rid of a lusus life for us will become a be Altos which in Greek means unlivable.


It wasn't just about Greek existence it was Human existence there was something happening at a lusus with that potion with this beatific Vision that literally held civilization together like glue for the ancient Greeks and democracy of the Arts The Sciences. Everything else was an offshoot of that experience a loosest was the foundation what you one of the things you talked about was that there was this transference like the Eucharist eventually became a placebo. Do you do you think that that what do you think it was initially? Why do you think it was a psychedelic mushroom? So that's Allegro certainly thought that right, right. So electron Mark Allegro author of The Sacred Mushroom in the scroll.


So he releases that book in 1970 and he claims that Christianity is the guys for a near Eastern fertility cult and it's I mean, I think it's very interesting but there aren't many linguists who who support the proposition right? There's there's a lot of people that disagree with them pretty heavily, right? I mean front from like a purely linguistic perspective. Activities, I mean to explain it briefly. So he says that jewry this other yeah sacred Mushroom in the crotch. You read it several times. Did you read the Dead Sea Scrolls in the Christian myth as well from Allegro? Yeah. That's the one that was so the Catholic Church bought out the original one, right and they it was very difficult to get a hold of for the longest time. He had to buy copies of it. I've heard rumors to that effect.


Yeah, and then he so he comes out the second book The Dead Sea Scrolls in the Christian myth what what did knowing as much as As you know about language, what what did you did you feel like you made leaps? Did you feel like he made these connections that maybe were based on speculation. It's so he writes. It's pure philologist. Right? So it's word games and things that only linguists. I mean, I think it's incredible that people who aren't linguists can actually read that it's really really difficult to read sacred Mushroom in the cross. But the basic premise is that the New Testament written in Greek has this Semitic substratum. So underneath the Greek the Also, the gospel writers and Paul are actually referring to different terms in Hebrew or Aramaic and that these terms have an intern come from the Sumerian which any linguist would say is a language isolate that there is no real relationship between Sumerian and the Indo-European languages like Greek and the Semitic.


So the the premise of the argument is something that most linguists don't accept however, and and crawl Rock has written the afterward to one of the additions. You probably have of sacred Mushroom in the cross. Oh and he gets into some complex theories about psycholinguistics and this interesting idea that just because they aren't related. There are certain words certain name certain vocabulary like plant definitions which would carry across the different languages and I find that somewhat interesting. But when you when you dig into the the words that Allegro is recreating, he's he places an Asterix actually next to these words because they can't be corroborated by the ancient texts. So some of these Sumerian words he It up hypothesize has as existing but they're not really can't really be found in the existing tablets.


So it's hard to correlate some of those meanings. He draws down from the cimmerian, but that said he makes very interesting claims. For example, like in 1 Corinthians 22. There's this interesting line where he says about that we preach Christ crucified is is a scandal on for the Jews and a Folly for the Greeks and scanned alone in Greek means like a bolt or a snare like a trap. And Allegro ties it to like a Tickler in Aramaic which is like the Woody what he calls the bolt mushroom and in cimmerian acoustic Viola and so he's saying that Paul is actually telling the Jews that you know, the Christ crucified is a mushroom instead of a scandal on it's like it like a code word like the Scandal own is a mushroom.


And then for the Greeks he says, it's a Folly which is Moira in Greek, which actually means Mandrake which is another psychedelic plan. So there's all this this different word play. Going on but it's really hard to tease out any physical forensic evidence for this stuff, which was what I was what was allegro's position. If I recall correctly that the sacred mushroom was Amanita. Muscaria. Yeah, that was even the cover of his book. Well, yeah photo company was Korea and that and that's where I have a I think Allegro did amazing work, but that's that's one area where I where I have a problem with with Amanita. Muscaria as the as the Psychedelic of choice in early Christianity because in shamanic cultures where Amanita muscaria is used.


It's recognized that the potion that the mushroom is much more effective after it's been passed through Human body or indeed through the body of a reindeer and emerged in urine. And so so the those shamanistic cultures of Siberia use Amanita muscaria by drinking it in the urine of a shaman who has previously consumed the mushroom, and I don't see a lot of evidence for that in early Christianity and it's why I like the work that Brian has done looking at the really hard evidence for psychedelics in early Christianity, which are not which are not in the This case I'm Anita muscaria. If I'm correct. Brian isn't the speculation about Amanita.


Muscaria that it's seasonable. It's seasonal. It's also genetically variable like there's there's different species out like much like different fruits taste differently. There's different versions of the Amanita. Muscaria that have more psychedelic chemical compounds in them. And then there's all sorts of ways of preparing them that we've completely lost isn't it my getting this wrong? Because I've only had one Amanita muscaria. Incident wasn't very convincing. Hmm. Yeah, and this is this is often often the case, but but I'm told I've not had the experience myself, but I'm told that if you can bear the idea of drinking the shamans urine after he or she has consumed the Amanita.


Muscaria. You will have a really powerful Journey. Yeah, but you don't want a shaman just laughing hysterically after you drink his yeah absolutely joke's on you stupid. Yeah. There's also so many correlations between the Amanita. Muscaria and Santa Claus and Santa Claus. Oz to to shamans there's some others the red wire. Yeah, there's also the you know the bag the toys the fact that they would drive them on on these coniferous trees the fact that this these mushrooms have this mycorrhizal relationship with coniferous trees with a they tend to grow under pine trees, which is the tree that we use for Christmas. She thought for the fact that they're bright red like a toy that is in a package waiting for a Child open it up.


It's there's so many of these Weird connections the colors the fact that reindeer are with Santa Claus the fact these reindeer fly, you know to have a yeah, I mean, it's at that Caribou are notoriously attracted to Amanita muscaria mushrooms. In fact people that have had psychedelic rituals and gone outside to urinate avtovaz about Caribou knocking them over to try to get to their urine Caribou are reindeer, you know, it's and they have been observed eating these things so they have his way. Weird relationship all those things are together connected in some sort of a strange way. And there's also a history of shamanic rituals being outlawed in Siberia.


And the way they got around it was they would come through the chimney, which is just crazy. They would they would climb onto people's roofs and and and slide down the chimney to deliver the mushrooms. It's just another another example of the way that our culture takes an ancient historical truth and completely castrates it and turns And turns it into Santa Claus, you know, whereas what we are at what we are actually dealing with our profound experiences in deeply Altered States Of Consciousness. What's also this information seems to have been lost fairly recently because if you go back to the early 1950s and 40s and look at birthday or Christmas cards, the Christmas cards and depictions of Christmas almost always contained elves and Amanita.


Muscaria mushrooms, the Amanita muscaria mushroom was synonymous with Christmas for some strange reason have you seen those old? Yeah, it's crazy. Right? Like what is that? Look it's all over the the fairy tale book still. You can't you can't avoid the the Amanita? Yeah everywhere you look which is why I think allegro was also interested writing in 1970 and studying it in the 50s and 60s. I think that's why he glommed onto the Amanita but it's such an unconvincing mushroom. Like the people that I know that have experienced it in terms of a psychedelic ritual. It's just I don't know anybody who's really blow their brains out with it now and Gordon Watson also thought it Was the the ingredient behind Soma as well, he writes a book about this in 1968 Soma Divine mushroom of immortality that that that was his guests to for Soma but wasps and was experienced with psilocybin which is so universally regarded as being effective.


That's why it's so confusing. I always found that strange to to be honest. So Wasson, I mean to explain where this where this comes from Watson has this incredible experience with Mar?a Sabina and 1955 and Oaxaca Mexico and when he zooms the we thinks it's a loss would be Mexicana and he is catapulted to the heavens and he has his vision that he describes as the realest thing. He's ever experienced under the influence of the psilocybin and the thought occurs to him. He writes later in 1957 and Life Magazine. He says that the could it be the case that the Divine mushrooms are. In fact the answer behind the ancient Mysteries, which is why he then went and started looking at the Amanita perhaps or eventually ergot.


Which is where I pick up the scent at some point in his correspondence with Albert Hofmann. They together began focusing on ergot like we said because it's so common and so natural but so highly toxic to and Albert claim to have this experience with it. And so for four years and years after teaming up with call Rock, they were convinced that ergot had to had to somehow be involved. So what is the speculation of what the Eucharist originally was? According to the early gnostics. Yeah, I mean, what is there any text that explains what the initial food was? Well, I mean, we have the canonical explanation from the gospels we have and we have st.


Paul's letter. I mean the honest answer and I think any priest would say this too is the honest answer is we don't know, you know, the gospels are written any time between 65 and 100 AD Paul's letters are some of the earliest writings that we have like the The letter to the Corinthians, for example, he's rewrites that in about 53 ad and the way he describes what's happening. There is very very interesting. Maybe we can we can pull it up. Actually. I brought some of the some of the Greek from the new Corinthians. It's under Christian pharmacon. And the for Corinthians 11:30. So at some point I was looking for I was looking for what that original Eucharist was Depend and where it was taken.


So you have to have to think about the the Greek world at this time. You know, Jesus is born in the Holy Land but Christianity really takes root in the Greek speaking parts of the Empire, which is why Paul's letters are written to greek-speaking people. Right and why it's interesting to follow this Theory because you have the the ancient Greek speaking Greek in the Pagan world, but you also have ancient Greek speaking Greek in this christianizing world. And so People in Corinth is this church? Not far from a loosest. By the way. In fact today. It's only an hour west of a lusus. And one of the earliest churches is there and Paul is addressing this early church in Greek and at the bottom you can read the English, but he's essentially yelling at them for consuming the wrong kind of Eucharist and earlier in this in this chapter.


He calls it a cup of demons and at the end he says that's why so many of you are weak and sick and a number of you have Fallen asleep, and I highlighted the the word Kumon tithe are so coy motto in Greek. I can tell you for certain does not mean to fall asleep. Quemado means to die because it's the exact word that John's gospel uses about Lazarus member the famous Miracle were Lazarus dies and he's resurrected. That'd be a pretty shitty miracle if Lazarus was just taking a nap and Jesus went to wake him up from a nap. So the and uses the the same verb there what Paul is saying? Here is that he's concerned that so many Corinthians are drinking a wine that is causing them to Die Why would wine cause you to die in a Greek world that had no distilled liquor.


There was no hard alcohol in ancient Greece distilled liquor doesn't enter Europe until much much later 8th 9th 10th centuries ad right at this time. There's no word for alcohol either alcohol is Arabic if you listen to the word like Alchemy or algebra or Alcove all these Al words all come from the Arabic Al is like the the article in Arabic like l in Spanish or illness Italian. So at this point wine is not known for its alcoholic content wine is a potion that is routinely mixed with all kinds of stuff toxins spices perfumes and plants herbs and fungi. And here we don't know what to make of it. But the Corinthians are drinking something that's causing them to Die.


The word is die Coy motto absolutely means to die. Because it's the word that in fact, you can go to the next slide Jamie. It's the if you look it up right there. It means just like we would say the sleep of death, but it means death and elsewhere in the gospels. It's the exact word used for what happened to Lazarus before his miraculous resurrections. The whole point of the miracle he is coma. Oh, he has fallen asleep to the death of sleep. Whoa. So the speculation is that there's some sort of a psychedelic or a A fungi or something that's in the wine that's causing them to die and they're using it regularly recreationally and they're they're trying to discourage this.


That's that that's how I read it and it's and it's not just based on a random read of this one line in Corinthians. It's based on an understanding of what Greek wine actually was how far back it goes which is centuries and centuries before this how it was mixed what it was mixed with even in the first century. There's a guy called dice Cortese Agra a Greek pharmacologist. In fact, he's called the father of drugs and at the same time that these gospels and Paul's letters are being written. He writes something called the Materia Medica. It's these five books in Greek and every drug prescription you've ever had in your life exists because dice Cortese wrote that manuscript and in that manuscript in book 5, he lists out in book five alone 56 different recipes for spiked wine and in the Greek he shows you how to Spike wine with everything from Salvia to hellebore to henbane, which he says is good for Swan genitals.


So if you have swollen genitals, you you dissolve henbane into wine. He says if you drink Mandrake wine, like allegro was talking about Mandrake. It'll kill you and one cupful and then he says this about black Nightshade and book 474. He says if you dissolve Nightshade into wine, it will produce fantasy has a dice which in Greek Means not unpleasant Visions. So just from the literature we can tell that the Greeks absolutely knew how to spike wine with very powerful substances Graham. I got to tell you your microphone is really sensitive. So anytime you do anything it any movement or breathing it bangs around for whatever reason.


I'm sorry. I just just have to make you aware of it. So I have to sit still. No everything's fine. But anytime you bet. It's just really it overpowers everything. Nothing, unfortunately their sorry can I be turned down at the switchboard or something? I don't know. It's I don't think that's what it is. I think this type of the recording that says jamiel cleaned it up writing down. It's okay. He's writing down all the noises. That's how good Jamie is. I wanted to bring up Sage to you because one of the things that you you talked about was Salvia Salvia is Sage right? They are basically in the same species at least when those priests would be walking down the aisle and they would be Going Sage the burning sage was that for some sort of a psychedelic effect.


Is that the reason why they were doing that? So when it comes to incense, we actually have an answer now. I'm not sure if you know this but earlier this year in May there were some researchers in Israel who released one of the first arkeo chemical studies of ancient incense. Have you heard about this yo-yo? It's so Justin met at a place called tell added in Israel south of Jerusalem west of the Dead Sea there. There was the the organic remains of some kind of incense that was burned on these two altars that is described by the researchers as kind of a scaled-down version of Solomon's Temple. It's data to the 8th Century BC. So in the Judah height period so we could feasibly say the beginnings of the judeo Christian period.


Oh, yeah, there it is frankincense. I love that word. So under archeo chemical analysis and and this this sample actually been excavated years ago in the 1960s. Was deposited in the museum, but the thing with with this this science, which is amazing is that they can resurrect this stuff no matter when it was excavated. So fortunately it wasn't contaminated and after analysis, they found it contain THC CBD and CBN. So that's a hydrogen a banal kind of cannabidiol and cannabinol and so it's the first they say, it's the first example of psychoactive drug use in the ancient Holy Land essentially, so when they were walking down the The aisle would they use only we know that was Cannabis, but Sage was used as well.


Right and Sage is salvia divinorum, which is a more potent psychedelic than cannabis. If I think that's a new world plant though is if I'm not mistaken. Oh, yeah there I mean at least the one you're thinking of so when they use say when you say New World you talking about European work in the Americas. Oh Marik has really so Sage use when they would have it in that. What is that grabbed? You would know this. What is that thing that they walk down the aisle? With when they blow the sense sensor a sense what that's really what's called the sense or the NSO R. Yeah. Yeah sensors. They interesting do blow entendre there. Yeah censorship. Yeah, so they were most certainly using cannabis or something else that they were burning and they're getting everybody high and frankincense.


Yeah, and what is frankincense? It's an aromatic spice. So it just smells smells. We don't think it's psychoactive, but maybe at the right dose it could be mmm. The Cannabis certainly was so they would give everybody marijuana smoke just walk down the aisle and blow marijuana smoke on everybody if I may add whether or not the smoke is psychedelic. It is adding to the experience. It's adding to the to the setting and again anybody who's worked with psychedelics will know that the setting is at least as important as the substance itself. So there they are masters of creating this this mysterious and powerful and energizing setting. Which the Psychedelic experience can then unfold?


It's such a bummer that we know so little about what exactly was going on. But so nice that someone like you who has done these deep dives into it where at least we could pull out whatever we can and it just makes me think like what where would we be if people like you weren't doing this it's so it's so rare. This is why I'm not doing DNT man. I wouldn't I don't know you might be doing it with more. Feverish need you might be really obsessed with it. It's just it's it's so strange and Graham. I always go back to your your statement, which I think is such a great quote that we're a species with amnesia.


Yeah in regard to our archaeology our history, but also in regard to our use of psychedelics. Yeah what we've just not been given the straight scoop about about our past. Times it's just purely the way that Scholars work that academics work and sometimes I think in the credit case of Christianity, it is actually a kind of conspiracy. I think there was a deliberate effort to cover up the role of psychedelics and you could see why priests in the developing Roman Catholic faith who've already pulled on the jackboot of the Roman Empire you could see why they wouldn't like their congregations using psychedelics because when you use psychedelics, you have a direct experience.


Science of the Divine and hey, you don't need that priest anymore. The priest has an intermediary between you and the Divine becomes becomes redundant and and I think that there was a concerted effort to cover up the role of psychedelics in early Christianity and to present a different narrative, which it was purely was the bread and the wine the blood and the body of Christ in a symbolic sense and not in an in an actual sense of a substance that connects us to the divine. The literature that connects the Banning of these psychedelic rituals in 4th Century, you're saying how does it describe it? And what was the what was the reaction by the people?


I mean at the time so you have to remember that the Greek Mysteries existed for a long long time. Yeah, we don't know exactly how long but the excavators and this this began in in a looses for example in 1887. They did it back to at least 1500 BC. So if it survives until the fourth Century ad you're talking almost 2000 years as long as Christianity itself has been around and the Mysteries themselves and there are serious Scholars. Who came Along in the 70s to say this could have prehistoric Roots which is how I started the investigation by asking how how this actually got to the Greeks because what's interesting about this kooky on potion for example is that it's not wine based in that hymn to Demeter that came down to us.


She's actually offered wine in this mythical story that takes place. He's out looking for her daughter Persephone who has been abducted and kidnapped to the underworld and she looks for her for nine days and nights in can't find her and she She rests her bones exhausted at a lusus and they try to offer her wine and she says no she wants that water barley and mint and again Hoffman Watson and rock thought it was kind of like a primitive version of beer. If you think about it reads like a very simple beer recipe now for the Greeks all the way through the Classical period through playtone afterwards for them to be drinking beer instead of wine is very very weird for them to have a secret mystery religion. That's not written down remember the civilization that birth Literature and the concept of the University as we know it is also very weird.


So it's like they're they are retaining this very prehistoric ritual and this very prehistoric beverage which is beer and as I trace it back further and further you can see clues of beer being used in funerary and Mortuary rituals as far back as 13,000 years and there are some who think that that beer actually precedes bread at that moment. We call the Agricultural Revolution where the upper Paleolithic becomes a Neolithic and Graham writes a lot about this and very beautifully at Gobekli Tepe for example, so I was able to trace back the potential Brewing of religious beer all the way back to Gobekli Tepe.


And the speculation is that this religious beer had some our got in it. Possibly. It's possible. It's possible. We haven't done much testing for her got that far back. I mean we're at that. That's why I wanted to write this book. Because the science is relatively new archeo chemistry for example is relatively new. It's some of the better findings have been coming out over the past 20 years which is which is like a baby in The Sciences. In fact a Pat McGovern at the University of Pennsylvania who I interviewed for the book described archeo chemistry at the time in the late 90s when he was producing some incredible finds as like an infant which would make it like a toddler today.


And so we're just beginning to put these pieces together so we can't say there were Psychedelic beer 13,000 years ago. The question right now is kind of was there beer at all and there are there's very early indications at Gobekli Tepe itself that they were brewing beer and at another site to the southwest and Israel at Mount Carmel outside - there's this really interesting place called The Rock effete cave and it was a burial site with about 30 individuals. This is between 11,700 BC and 9700 BC a team from Stanford went in there and Found these Boulder mortars in which they found traces of the malting and mashing of grains, which they think was for beer.


This is 13,000 years ago Graham, which brings it which brings us to the to the upper Paleolithic and then we have the whole mystery of rock and cave art all around the world. So Brian is right. We haven't got the analysis that proves that a psychedelic was in that 13 thousand year old beer, but what We do have 13,000 years ago and going back much further 27 40 50 thousand years ago is Art and that aren't really only makes sense as psychedelic art. I mean what where else but in a Visionary state, do you see an entity that is part human and part animal in form that is part of lion and party human being that's not something you see every day.


It's not something that you see when you're out hunting game, but seeing these therianthrope says Cold is a very common experience in deeply Altered States Of Consciousness. So the art itself speaks to us of artists who had had powerful experiences in deeply Altered States. What is the conventional conventional speculation about those images the half-man half-animal images increasingly it is but that they document psychedelic States. There's a professor at the University of witwatersrand in South Africa. David Lewis Williams written a book called The Mind in the cave whose documented this in great detail that the only possible explanation for this art, which is found all over the world is not just found in one region or one place is that the artists were shamans that they were experiencing Altered States Of Consciousness and when they return to a normal everyday State of Consciousness, they remembered their visions and painted them on Cave walls and those Visions would might well be a lion man or a bison man, and that entity had Communicated with them just in the way that entities communicate with us today under the influence of DMT or psilocybin.


Did you have a sense of urgency while you were writing this they did you understand that this is something that very few people who are legitimate Scholars are going to really tackle. I hadn't been done and I don't know why nobody was was doing this and combining the humanities and the Linguistics with with the Sciences. I've been waiting for this book. To come along and no one wrote it see you had to write it yourself. I wasn't doing DMT and I plenty of free time. How long did it take 12 years. Wow. Did was there any point in time where you were like, what the fuck am I doing? If you ask my wife? Yes, especially if you're supposed to be a lawyer man, no one's paying you for this you went to the Vatican was it was the real issue?


Oh, yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yes. You know what? It's a good point. This is this is really really hard and it brings up something. I've been talking with the researches about this too. So when I talk about archeo chemistry, I mentioned Pat McGovern at UPenn, there's another guy and ruko at MIT and every time I have a question, these guys are there to answer it Andrews awesome. He's a younger guy in his mid-40s. He's been doing this stuff his whole life. He has a background in Classics like like I do and so he's the only person I've talked to who sees like the the legitimacy of this kind of suit because he's one of those guys who can think about the humanities and the Sciences at the same time, but it's tough this there is no discipline for this.


You can't get a PhD in the hunt for ancient intoxicants. No one's out there studying for it. It just doesn't exist. And those who do study it find it very very hard to get gainful employment. You can't get paid to do this stuff and so a little bit later. We'll talk about to archeo chemist. I've been in touch with who have remarkable findings that I want to share here, but Each since left the discipline so they were doing incredible work 20 years ago in the late 90s and early 2000s were finding incredible things. But I mean life being what it is. They had to leave the profession was good to that. Now, who are they and what do they so there's a couple different guys one there. So there are two finds that I really went out of my way to put into this book one is trying to find hard evidence of this erga ties beer and the other is trying to find an actual hard evidence of wine.


That's been spiked and ideally that would that would be Spike wine in the context of some kind of Christian ceremony or some syncretic Greek Christian ceremony and the first century ad and so I spent years and years trying to get in contact with these folks and reading through the archeo botany journals and I'll start with the ergot first since I was really kind of fascinated with ergot and this hypothesis from 1978 because it sits there for now 40 years and there's no hard data to come. And people often argue about ergot the same way we argue argue about Anita and the other candidates because it's it doesn't make sense. We know it's there. We know it's common but it doesn't make the most sense as the thing that would have spiked this beer.


So I spent a long time looking for organized beer or any beer that was spiked. Now, if you go to the top archeo chemists or archeo botanists in the US the UK or Europe and I did for many years and I asked them the very simple question. Is there any Botanical or all data of beer having been spiked with psychedelics and the universal answer that would always come back is no and so I'd ask them again and the answer would be no and so I started to think about the ancient world and what that meant and what ancient Greece meant and so first I went to the site at a lusus to ask the archaeologist there if we could test her vessels and I couldn't believe that nobody had ever asked her if they could submit the test the vessels to Chemical Testing and so I flew there and I talked to her about it and But unfortunately, they've all been treated for conservation purposes.


They put them in museums and they exhibit them to the public and when you do that you contaminate the the artifact and it's no longer testable. So that was my dead end and that's where things stop for a while and that's where my wife starts asking, you know, if you Ryan you flew to Greece by yourself and let your two daughters at home for no reason so you can ask a lady if you could test her her chalice. Has and she told you know, and now what you going to do and so I said, well I'm going to get creative man. And so I thought about the ancient Greek World. Here's the thing about the ancient Greek world in in the wake of Alexander. The Great who was called the great for a reason the Greek influence after the 4th 3rd centuries, BC which stretched all the way from Iberia Spain and Portugal to Afghanistan in the East.


I'm not sure if many folks realize that but the the greek-speaking where the Greek influence part of the world was in awe. Miss and so if you're looking for evidence of this cookie on why would you restrict yourself to Athens and a lusus so I took a step back and I started thinking where else would there be a Greek presence and I didn't expect to find one but I landed on Iberia eventually because I started researching ergot in different languages. That was that was my first clue, you know, they're in English. We have this one weird word for it sure got that actually in German. There's lots of words for it bizarrely enough. Maybe it's because of the history of Brewing but in German, there's Optical on Musa Khan told con which means crazy corn crazy grain are totin corn which means death corn and so it's weird that you know, as you look elsewhere.


It seems to be more common to the German mind and then in Spanish, I just started random Googling for what that is. It's called coordinates widowed instant this antenna and Spanish and a couple things start popping up and this these Notions of Spike be Started popping up where they weren't supposed to I never expected to find them. So the first hit that came in was from an archaeological site kind of in the middle mid west of Spain called the Valladolid and they're in 2003. They found a Greek vessel called a Greek chalice called a Katniss and it's the same kind of vessel that's used in the eleusinian Mysteries. It's a it's like this little cup with a tiny cup on the outside.


I brought a picture for you if you want to see it. Sure Jamie and I'm in in Moscow stage are If you scroll to the bottom and copy of p29. So this this this Kate that's it. So this came from a site called the necropolis of Las ruedas. And the necropolis of Las ruinas. Is this archaeological site that was dated to about the second century BC. Now, these aren't Greek people. This is a pre Roman population called the vodka or the vaccines, but for some reason in this cabin has it tested positive for beer spiked with high-risk.


I mean, if you go to the to the next tab, Jamie, you'll see that they wrote up its in Spanish but there you'll see that the at this number 76 and 77 when they tested the the cat and mouse which is a very Greek word. By the way, when they test it the Cavanaugh's it tested positive for traces of how Sky. I mean and how sky mean can only occur in these solanaceous plans these Nightshade plans you're talking so that it's the family of plants that includes very boring things like the tomato plants and or the potato or tobacco, but it has these night. Shades like Mandrake again or henbane? And so it's one of those tropane alkaloids that could have been in henbane.


For example. So here you're talking about a henbane beer, which is really weird. The even weirder part is that this is found in a funeral complex just like just like you would find that Gobekli Tepe or the rocket that cave in Israel 13,000 years ago here after thousands and thousands of years. You're seeing this pre-roman population using beer spiked with henbane. In a death cult and where the researchers say that it was used to either facilitate the deceased's travel to the other world or maybe the people who were there ushering the deceased into the other world. They actually use that phrase. Holy shit. Go back to that image of the cop again, please.


So why does it have the cup on the outside of it again? There's the large vessel and there's a small vessel to the side of it. We don't know that that's just what that that's what a kind of knossos if you scrolled it possibly have been portion control exactly. If you scroll to the to the top Jamie you'll see two other catenoid on the top right there. Yeah. And so this is this is the next part of the of the clue. So these came from Only on the east coast of Iberia called employee on which was a bustling Greek colony. And these are our care our other cat of NOS vessels just like you would see at a loosest.


These are the kinds of things that they think the initiates were drinking from now, they don't make for very good drinking vessels, but maybe they make for good mixing vessels like for dosage control. Yeah. Something is going on there that that's that's what they thought the Cardinals was at a losses for example, and that's what I wanted to test with the archaeologist there who said no. And so now we're finding these vessels in Spain where they're not supposed to be and I can sit as a classicist or one-time want to be class assist. The the first thing you think of when you think about the ancient Greeks is not Spain and all of a sudden I'm coming across this idea of Spike beer in Spain. It's just not supposed to be there. That's so fascinating. So this image, what is the can go back to that original image?


Jamie of the yeah, the the cup with the small cup next to it. What what is there? What's the conventional description of what this is and why it's shaped this way. I mean the the Spanish archaeologists. They also call this a cat knows they I mean it's the the extent of the Greek influence at that particular site. This is the pintia archaeological site the extent of the relationship and the network is a little unclear. At least at least to me. It's unclear how strong the Greek presence was there. But at the time by the second century BC because the Greeks were already in these other port cities. Basically, it's not inconceivable that some kind of trade was happening and these vessels would have made their way Inland.


Do they have a description as to why there's a small cup connected to the larger cup though. It would be the same as any Greek archaeologist has to we don't know why this was this was associated with the Mysteries. No one knows why the really does logically make sense that it would be some sort of a portion because it's a very small obviously you don't want to have too much of that shit. Yeah, that's it really does it really does? Complete sense actually, yeah that that but that's what it is that you take one portion of this and makes it with 10 portions of that. Yeah, and then you're going to have an interesting journey. I can't think of another explanation off the top of my head. Obviously. I'm not qualified to speculate but when I'm looking at this, I'm thinking oh that completely that fits but you're on you're on the right track because that that that's that's where it led me to was portion control.


Yeah, and that's what I found next would find last. I found it. I found something. this man would you find man so Karen has right I'm thinking Cardinals vessels. And so the vessel doesn't just show up in the middle of Spain there chose up on the coast at this. And so this this this town's called import Eon and today it's called imperious and it's in in Catalonia in Northeast Spain close to the border with friends and to be totally honest. I'd never heard of him putting on and I'm not sure if many classes have but it was a bustling import-export business of the ancient Greeks founded by the foci ins who came from Ionia, which is today modern day Turkey.


And they found this place in 575 BC and we think that the religion comes with them or some kind of religion Jamie. If you go back to Moscow stage are you can see just an exterior shot of what this this Colonial Town looks like and when you look at it again there, yeah. I mean it looks that could be Southern Greece that could be an island in Greece that that's on the the Northeast Coast of Spain. That's a statue of Escape use the Greek god of healing standing in a courtyard in Spain. And the statute dates to at least at 5th Century, BC. Wow, and we don't know really what's going on. But in the next Slide the foci ins who founded this place were devotees of that Spirit that's supposed to be Persephone on the left the Greek goddess Persephone the goddess of the Underworld the same goddess who the initiates would find when they made their pilgrimage to a lusus and drank the potion.


They went there to meet Persephone. Yeah, and there she is on their coins. Wow. And then it gets more interesting how so these people don't don't stick to the coast. They go Inland at some point and they go Inland for a reason and there's a site that they that they found called Moscow stage. Are they pontos? It's a tiny town called puntos and there's this farm that the archaeologists described as a Greek Farm a bit further Inland Jamie. If we go, if we go back to the the same file there we can just click through a bunch of the images and the kinds of things that they found There which are indicative of the Greek Mysteries so that so starting with her.


For example, that was that was Unearthed at this archaeological site and pontos and the archaeologists responsible for this tag has been the same woman over the past since 1990. Her name is Enrique tampons. She found this and other objects. She calls this the head of Persephone. Wow, or it could be the head of Demeter, but she either way if she thinks it's a Greek goddess and this is 3rd Century, BC. So obviously there's some intense influence. These are Greco Italian M4. I also did to the 3rd Century BC. And the next one that's also some kind of Demeter percent. That's an incense burner. By the way, you stick incense in the top of it light it up depending on what your incense is, and it's used in cult rituals.


That's 3rd Century BC and then it gets weirder. They find this 5th Century BC that belongs in the dining room in Athens. Not on a farm in Spain. That is that that's the origin of Comedy right there, believe it or not. That's that's that's called a cone Moss Como's in ancient Greek is one of these drunken parades in honor of the god Dionysus. These are the first paid regulars at The Comedy Store and he's got his dick out like Ari shaffir. Wow, that's crazy. So then it gets weirder just south of the site they find this and this is Thomas triptolemus is kind of the missionary of the Mysteries.


So after Demeter establishes her temple in a lusus, they send this guy to go scouring the Earth to carry the knowledge of the Grain and farming across across Europe and if you go to the next one, Jamie, you'll see that it's very similar to the kind of triptolemus things that show up in Greece. This is from the The elusive Museum on site in a lusus if you compare the two you see a dude on a flying dragon carton the left and a dude on a flying dragon card in the right there. Both triptolemus the last place I ever expect it to find triptolemus was a farm in Spain and there it is.


Wow. So if triptolemus tells you anything it tells you that the Mysteries went West when they're not Post too by the way Graham alluded earlier to this incident that happened in Athens in 414 BC to celebrate the Mysteries outside of a looses is a sacrilege a total sacrilege. It was called The Prophet nation of the Mysteries and one of Socrates star disciples. This guy Alka bodies was caught indulging in the mystery ceremony at home instead of at the temple and he became the Ed Snowden of the ancient world. He was ostracized they would have killed him if he didn't run from Athens, so this was serious stuff and And and sacred stuff. So for them to be celebrating the Mysteries if you think about it kind of makes sense because no one's looking over their shoulder and Spain if it's going to happen anywhere.


Maybe it'd be on in the Hinterlands of the Empire. So this is people that realized that they wanted to continue these rituals and couldn't do it in Greece anymore. They had to get out right? Where are these were folks who either couldn't afford or didn't want to go all the way to a loses. I mean you're in Spain imagine getting to you can't get to a losses today. Imagine getting to a lusus 2,000 years ago 2,500 years ago. It's really really difficult and this time at get that may give a parallel. It's rather like somebody seeking an Ayahuasca experience today and perhaps they can't afford to go all the way to the Amazon rainforest or it just seems too big a journey. So they're going to look for somewhere nearer to home where they can have that experience and indeed Ayahuasca is available all over the world now.


Yeah, and that's pretty recently right like within the last couple of decades it's available. People all over the world red rapidly within the last couple of decades and I think Brian is suggesting that a similar sort of thing was happening in the ancient world with a different substance the guys names. So right on the nose to trip tomorrow on us, I never thought about that until until right now because I don't do it the ante but I mean trip people tripping. I mean, it's just ridiculous that his name is trip with interesting. I mean look at him. He's riding a dragon is name is triptolemus. And on the next one to Jamie, you'll see there's another triptolemus from from Kapaa. This is Italy so he did go west we know he went to Italy and if he went to Italy why wouldn't he go to Spain and look at the style of art?


It's completely Greek. Wow, pretty psychedelic at the same time. Yes. I am. Right. Yeah it is it's but it's so it's so uniform that in the three different locations. You have the same imagery. Wow, and so the question that wasin Hoffman and Ruck would immediately immediately ask is what is triptolemus doing. There is he really was he really sent as a missionary to teach people how to farm. That's that that's the traditional system that weakness hands. That's exactly right. So he will hear God he was dispatched. He was dispatched to teach people how to grow cereals. However across the Neolithic period people know how to farm people are already farming.


So it starts in the Bread Basket that Gobekli Tepe in Anatolia. We have farming across Europe in Greece as early as 6500 BC. It's by 4,000 or so BC. It's all over Europe. Why would triptolemus need to be sent on a mission to teach people to do? Something they already knew how to do which is farm. And so what they would say is he was teaching not about growing the grain, but about what grows on the grain which is erga of course and look someone's pouring something too. Yeah, that's one of those just ritual ablutions. Mmm. Wow. So then it gets more interesting.


Okay waiting Jamie. We're so waiting Brian in addition to triptolemus and the heads of Demeter and Persephone and to get the ponds finds this gem which is a 250 square foot ritual Sanctuary that she calls in Spanish a couple Asia domestica, which is a household Shrine and she believes it's a household Shrine that is specifically dedicated to Reenacting the mysteries of Demeter and Persephone for people who wanted to get in touch with their Greek ancestors and she calls this a ritual room for the living to interact with the Dead.


Wow, but you still need some Greek influence. So in the next slide, you'll see the altar where the activity was happening. Does that look Greek very so that's a column that was proven by petrographic analysis to have originated at the mount pentelic his Quarry Northeast of Athens. It came from Greece and it's sitting in Spain and what they're doing on that aside from burning incense all around is they're sacrificing dogs. They found the remains of three female. Dogs, there's only one goddess in Greece associated with that and that's Hecate who's the mother of the which Cersei and the patroness of all witches and they're sacrificing dogs to her because she's known as the kunos fog A's in Greek, which is the dog eater.


What? God the other things you find in that room aside from the Greek Altar and the Greek goddess to whom dogs are being sacrificed in an underworld Journey were the living and dead or communing is a Greek Hearth and educate the uses the Greek word as Kata for that. You can go to the next one Jamie. So in addition to the Greek Altar and the Greek Hearth, she finds these which are very Greek shaped cups. These are called con thoreau's the contras is the ritual vessel. That was only used by the god Dionysus. This to drink his magic potion. She finds about 10 of these in and around the area and when I heard all this after the Greek influence is swimming on this place.


I called up call Ruck who at the time was 84 years old. He's now 85 years old and his career was severely impacted after the release of night to the 1978 book The Road to a loses his career essentially tanks. It was the classic case of the wrong book at the wrong time. He was not supposed to write this because he did he was deposed as the clit as the chair of the classics Department. He was cut off from grad students. He was discouraged from interdisciplinary scholarship with his colleagues and he became the drug guy, you know classes his don't write about drugs, but the book really really impacted his life and he became kind of the black sheep of the classics estate and there's no evidence to prove that this organized beer actually exist.


And so, you know his career kind of went into Nosedive and so I've been keeping him up to speed on all this work. And so I called him up and invited him to come see this this ritual Chapel with me. And so that's him getting his very first look at the at the incense burner and and the cup and there. He's an ancient staring contest with Demeter looking at this cup and I didn't take him all the way to Spain just so he could look at a cup. It's because of what was in the cup and so in the mid-1990s after it was excavated. And this woman enter Kata the archaeologists for some reason. We don't know why she got in touch with a young archaea botanist. I mentioned before Jordy and they subjected this this chalice to analysis and what they found was beer.


Wow. So this thing was filled at some point with some kind of ritual beer that was used in some kind of ceremony dedicated to Demeter and Persephone, but that's not all they found. They also found the remains of Urgot. And it is the first and most compelling data to support this scorn hypothesis from 1978 that's ever emerged. What was that like for him to experience that? He's had to be just completely mind-blowing but also frustrating that he was right all along. And I expected that to when I asked him I have a video of me talking to him at the chapel.


I asked him what this all means and he was he's not salty about it. He 42 years later 42 years. Yeah, not at all. Now. He's got a good life. He's happy. I think he I think he feels he I think he feels Vindicated. Yes, and and and I know he's excited to talk about this in public and The first time we're talking about it in public and I know he wants to dive deep on this but this is something he's dedicated his entire professional life to and he is you said he's 83 is 85 now 85. Yeah, how is he holding up physically, he's okay.


Now, he's in quarantine. He lives in this beautiful pre-revolutionary War home that I went to visit a couple years ago. I described it as something like the British museum having been ransacked by a Group of mischievous elves he is. He's surrounded by mushrooms and busts of Demeter and he's got some some artifacts that belong to Gordon Wasson who was his mentor many ways, you know father figures. So from 78 on he was just balls deep in the stuff. He dope head instead of turning around after he was yelled at for being the drug guy he if you look him up and his CV this this is it's all he does is right about the potential use of drugs in the in the ancient world. Did he have personal experiences?


Many yeah, so that's probably why I started writing about it as a matter of there's really no reason not as a matter of fact when I mentioned that letter from Albert Hofmann to Gordon Wasson in 1976 when he self Dost on the organic vegan, he sent some in the letter it says he sent some in the mail to Gordon Wasson who politely declined and made and made Ruck do it instead. Wow, so for rock, like what was it like for you to be able to show this to rock to give him hard evidence to show him these cops to tell him about the tests that we're done the fact that they discovered ergot the fact that they know these vessels were holding beer.


I mean this Vindication to be there physically while this Vindication emerges and psychedelic man. This had to be it was really emotional. I mean, it's still emotional for me and In to be clear, there's more testing and more analysis that needs to be done. This is this was this was 20 years ago. And the breaking news is that that original sample may be stashed away somewhere at the University of Barcelona and Jordi was going to go look for it covid intervene. So we very much want to retest this stuff and recover at MIT very much wants to get a chemical sample. So I want to be a little careful but the way it exists today is extraordinarily compelling and odds are there's probably even more evidence.


Some of which hasn't even been excavated and for for Ruck it's over for the field in general. I think it's it's really and I think it's extraordinary. Well the dots All Connect themselves. I mean, that's what's really amazing about it. It's if you look at what you've discovered and if you look at the history of these people getting together and having these rituals and what we know about psychedelics and particular LSD and what Albert Hoffman is showing and then any people who've experienced LSD know me. All fits right in it all makes sense. It's crazy. It's just it and what where would we be if you didn't write this book, that's what's really interesting. You know, it's there's the 7 plus billion people on this planet and it just takes one person to not listen to their wife and next thing you know, you hear that BJ, you're sure that deejay he was right.


Thank God. Is she cool? I think you just saved my marriage. I swear it I swear to Christ. Christ I think you just saved my marriage she cool with it now no, I mean yeah. Oh no, she wants to see how this goes and then she'll be cool. Oh, it'll go great man. This book's gonna sell like crazy. Are you going to do an audio version of it? I read it myself. Oh nice. When is it going to be out? Its out. Is it out right now? It should or today or tomorrow? Yeah. Okay because I tried to look for it yesterday. I really was on it wasn't or on no apple isn't available. Okay the 29th. I think the publication date is the 29th of September and that's also the same. Isn't that is the paperback of my Lost Civilization book America before I want to be clear that the immortality key is Brian's book.


Yes. Oh my God. My contribution to it is the is the forward and I'm grateful to Brian for asking me to do that. I think Brian has done really important work and I think the next step now is to demystify this field and and get more science at work on this subject instead of just closing our eyes and closing our minds to these extraordinary. A possibilities that we've been radically misled about our own paths. Yeah, and I think thanks thanks to the great work of Rick doblin and dr. Rick Strassman and yourself and so many other people that have contributed to this. It's now something that people are allowed to speculate about it's now something that people allowed to fast.


Yes. People are having real legitimate conversations about these things now hmm. Yeah. Yeah this this this was the the attempt to use 21st century. To test an ancient hypothesis and part of the part of the the issue is the ancient Greeks and the other parts the Christians. I mean all we had for a long time was Allegro, so I spent some time if Rock was right about this was Ruck right about what he writes about the Christians and he does write about psychedelic sacraments in the Christian. And what was his speculation about the Psychedelic sacraments in the Christian. He also likes the Amanita. Muscaria. Really? Yeah. Why is everybody like that one? Did you think it Mom this is all so I'm asking you as a person who has an experience psychedelics.


I do not know very many people that have had successful experiences with it. It's very confusing but I do recognize that it's in time like McKenna speculated very much that we've lost our ability to understand like how to prepare where where Wendy prepared when to pick it and then it's seasonal and there's so many variables, you know, I think We're ignorant about how to use these things in our society. I speak of a species with amnesia. We've forgotten the old techniques and the old ways of doing things. We've there's been a concerted effort in the modern world to demonize these substances and to cut them out of our lives and to associate them with irrational behavior and craziness and so on and so forth and to move to move forward in this field it I hate to use the word but it needs to be made more respectable because it's the key Key to understanding so much about ourselves that has been obscure and mysterious until now.


It's just for a person who's experienced it it's so strange the contrast between the experience itself and the Public's perception of it. Particularly the average person who has not experienced psychedelics who looks at it like this frivolous ridiculous thing. Like why would you engage in such a thing? Why would you I mean, I remember I had a conversation with Michio Kaku about it once talking to him about psychedelic. Shrooms and he was basically telling me like scientists want to strengthen their mind. They don't want to ruin their mind. And in that sense like you don't want to waste your mind on drugs. Yeah. Well, there's a guy needs to do some drugs. Yeah, exactly people make these kind of statements as though they're facts.


Yeah get those people have had no experiences of the of the substances concern but I think the first muscle rears though for his whole career. You almost have to say things like that or at least then we're talking when I have this conversation with him more than decade ago, probably 15 years ago. So when you have these experiences and you, you know, you run into the conventional perception of these you understand that these people almost like like what happened with Rock and what happened with many other Scholars that took chances and discuss these things you wound up being this crazy person you wound up being this easily dismiss person and it's very It's in many ways is discouraged in a very powerful way and it goes that has there has been a hugely well-organized and well-funded propaganda war against these substances our society Prides itself on the alert problem-solving State of Consciousness.


And the alert problem-solving State of Consciousness does have an important role to play but part of The Madness of our society why it's become so suicidally dangerous is because cuz the alert problem-solving State of Consciousness has been given a monopoly position and what psychedelics do is they undermine the dominance of the alert problem-solving State of Consciousness and they show us the much wider range of Consciousness that is a that is available. And and therefore they are Insidious to the powers that be those are as that run and control our world today don't want people thinking for themselves. They don't want the propaganda to be Picked by a mushroom and that's why we've faced this propaganda War and what we're dealing with is the legacy of that propaganda war and and the majority the majority of people unfortunately don't realize that they've been subjected to 50 or 60 years of lying propaganda.


They think it's actually all facts. Yeah. This is what these to be unpicked and we're in the middle of a crisis in this country in regards to police violence and police brutality and a big part of that is the War on Drugs. It's a giant out of it. It's responsible for the Brianna Taylor murder, which is being discussed right now and people are protesting. That was a War on Drugs. Absolutely. No knock rate. I mean that's that's that's what that's about and most of these or on drugs the toll this is the this is the thing is to completely maniacal I idea because ultimately it's not a war on drugs and I've used this phrase before it's a war on Consciousness. Yeah.


Our says he does not want certain kinds of Just has to be experienced. It wants to shut them down and and it treats us like children. If adults are not free to make Sovereign decisions about their own health their own Consciousness and their own bodies were doing no harm others. Then freedom is a meaningless word. Yeah, and unfortunately freedom is a meaningless word in the societies. We live in today. We do live in a heavily mind controlled Society where facts are what we're propaganda is disguised as fact. I agree with you, but I think this battleship is slowly turning and it is these kind of conversations that we're having right now.


It's responsible in a big way for Shifting the way people perceive these things for the longest time. The only way we've been explained to the only way these subjects have been explained to us is been in demeaning terms and that yeah that these are bad experiences and you're going to wreck your life. You're going to ruin your life and in when we're here saying well, Maybe it'll make you a better person like that. These are revolutionary thoughts and the 21st century that and the fact that there's so many people that are echoing these statements and so many really intelligent well-educated people who haven't ruined their lives who have families and jobs.


Yeah, and they're saying No, this is this is actually good for you. Yeah, and and, you know, if it comes down I think it needs to be recast in the issue of the individual freedom and individual sovereignty. Of course, there must be limits on it. Individual Freedom. We must not do harm to others in exercising our freedom but really taking a psychedelic is the least harmful thing is possible to do to anybody. It's an entirely inward experience and and it should not be controlled by the state and by government that What's Happening Here is that we are literally being treated like children as adults and it's a most unfortunate aspect of our society in the way. I see government seeking to use the current crisis to add to its Our to dominate people's lives to even enter into their home's to encourage neighbors to Snoop on one another.


It's a very Insidious Trend that we're in the War on Drugs has been a big part of that trend for a long time, but you're right Joe the battleship is turning around and it's turning around because people are waking up and they're saying we're just not going to put up with this shit any longer. We're not going to be told what to do. We're not going to be treated as infants by our government here here and the thing about the Psychedelic argument to it falls apart the the eye. Idea of criminalizing it because it lacks all of the rationalizations that you can get with crystal meth and cocaine and all death overdose all addiction like mushrooms are not addicting like these. These are the not addicting intermittent even and even so we already have laws that deal with negative behavior towards others.


So if somebody is on a particular substance and they harm somebody else we have a law governing at harm. They've done to somebody else. We don't need to have a law that enters the sanctum of the individuals Consciousness and tells that person what he or she may think and what he or she may experience. It's a really Huxley are score or will ask world that we're that we're messing with here. Now when you talk to rock about Christianity and about the use of the Amanita muscaria mushroom, does this he Echo the statements of gianmarco Allegro does he does he buy into that or does he have a parallel? Active on it like his the it's into it's kind of a hybrid in some of his writings.


He's a fan of the Amanita in others. He takes a broader approach and I think that that was my Approach looking at this too because the one thing that pops out at you from the ancient Christian world is wine and the one thing that pops out at you from the ancient Greek world is this is this spiked wine and rock does write quite a bit quite a bit about that in the road to a loosest the same book in 1978 where he talks about the surgut eyes beer. He is also talking. About spiked wine, but again, there wasn't much data to go on for the longest time. So same as I was kind of scouring the ancient world for evidence of this ergon ties beer. I took it upon myself to put his other crazy thesis to the test and I started looking at wine in the ancient world.


Not just for the Amanita. I did look for it. By the way. I look for evidence. I didn't find any but I found other evidence and it starts at the Louvre if I can show you a couple couple pictures, Jamie. Can you go to the Louvre? That's the first time anybody's ever said that t Jamie Jamie. So in an obscure footnote from 1970 a truck talks about a Greek priestesses spiking wine, and he makes a reference to an old book from the early 20th century by a German scholar called freaking house and freaking house talked about this Vaz that was apparently in the Louvre that nobody's ever seen.


And I took it upon myself to try and find that Vaz and so at the very top Jamie if you click on the drawing. This is this is a line drawing by freaking house himself of what he apparently saw in the Louvre at some point in the early 20th century and not many people have seen since so this is his illustration of what he recalls being on exactly. Exactly. And if you take a look at it or zoom into the woman on the right, you can see her preparing preparing additives for the wine and we can't really make out what they are. But the way freaking house drew it kind of looks like a mushroom and her left hand can't really tell Ruck says the other one is a sprig of some herb and again and again, you can't really tell so I sent an email to the curator at the Louvre Alexandra Katya new and I said, I'd like to take a look at this and I'd like to bring my friend along and my friend is Father Francis T So Roman Catholic priest who happens to be an expert botanist and herbalist, so I called up father Francis from his lab.


Tori in The Rustic parts that Italy and I said father Francis since you're trained at Columbia and Cornell and Harvard Divinity School and you know everything about plans will you come help identify this for me? And so he said sure So we met at the Louvre and we meet Alexandra and Alexandra says, you know these this boss I can find it for you, but it's not an exhibition. This is this is not in the public catalog. This is in our storage room. And if you want I can I can I can take you to the storage room and Show you this far as you've been looking for and I said great and she takes us up to the to the second floor past the statue of the winged victory of samothrace and she Usher's us into this completely empty stock room filled a thousands and thousands of Greek wine vessels and they're sitting on a table on the next picture.


Jamie are what she calls G 408 and G 409 and I believe this is one of the first color photographs taken of them. Hmm, there it is. And so we don't know what's happening here. But we've moved from those mysteries of dying of hallucis to the mysteries of Dionysus and there's father Francis with the with the magnifying glass trying to figure out what they're adding to the wine. And again, this is it's just a painting right? We don't know if this is recording an actual event, but we're speculating that that maybe the artist try to record something for posterity and this Vaz is from 5th Century BC. It's called red figure Pottery.


So pretty old. And we take a look and as we lean in further, I have a mini heart attack because the potteries been chipped just just where she's holding the other ingredient so we have no idea what's in the right hand, but I'll let you try and guess what you think is in the left hand on the next the next close up. So that's completely missing there. And this is all we have left. What is that? It certainly could be a mushroom. But it could be a lot of things right. It could be a lot of things. So it was a little disappointing.


Yeah. Wow, so when he originally saw it, it had been chipped. So it happened. So maybe I mean this is how this stuff goes missing. This is how this stuff stays secret. We don't know how or why it was chipped. Maybe he saw it chipped. It was probably chipped at some point and it's and it's long twenty five hundred year history and he just invented something to put their what would it be? What I was hoping to find was what you'll see in the next few slides and this is from a separate who the Ria 5th Century BC. At a museum in turkey and this is something Ruck has turned up over recent years. These are women very similar dionysian tradition adding plants and herbs to their wine Ruck identifies that as IV if you lean in if you go to the next one, Jamie, Ivy's often associated with Dionysus some of the ancient writers refer to wind spiked with i-iv as drunkenness.


Look at their eyes. Those ladies are tripping balls over there are so low, I think look at their eyes. That's not normal. Yeah, they are wide-eyed the next ingredients more interesting. So there's there's a second ingredient and in the next slide. Hmm. Yeah, I'm very much looking mushroom. Very mushroom. Yeah, I mean that would be hard to describe it as anything else. Mmm. Yeah. Wow. Hmm. So this is where the pottery takes us which is which is not very far.


I mean, maybe the artist meant to leave a clue maybe it represents an actual ritual. Maybe it doesn't we do know that the ancient authors are talking about this stuff a lot. You can go to the next the next slide Jamie and after that whatever whatever the wine was doing it people this is what it was doing. So when you drank the wine of Dionysus, this is like that that Como's I showed you that vas from Spain. This is this is not quite a Como's but it's another kind of ritual. It this is also in the Louvre if you had downstairs to the South they calculated you'll see the Borghese Vaz from 40 BC and before that this is so this is typically how an initiate of the Dainese and Mysteries will be pictured and the next one Jamie.


right the before that so when they when they drank the wine of Dionysus it wasn't to get drunk. Which one are you? number number 15 for gazing yeah So I've never seen anyone walk up the middle aisle in a Catholic mass and walk away looking like that. Yeah, that dude looks smashed though. It doesn't look like he's on mushrooms. He looks drunk. What is that thing on above his shoulder though. That looks like a mushroom Rock. So let's call a fair sauce. And the top part is called the narthex cognate with narcotics and rock thinks it's where they stuffed all the additives it's where they stuffed all the toxins for the for the wine and you off.


In see the initiates of Dionysus carrying these and you often see them over the head of the initiate. They didn't go anywhere without their their their cells ones. And this wand what was the the top of it made out of like like bundled leaves. Mmm. It was a hollow stock with bundled leaves in their rut believes that they would put their stash. Wow, so their whole thing was just adding things to alcohol adding things to wine at a things to beer. It's in fact, it was it was it would be abnormal not to add something to whine. So wine is routinely described in the ancient Greek as unusually intoxicating seriously mind-altering occasionally hallucinogenic and potentially lethal.


And for that reason one of the words used to describe wine for like a thousand years from Homer to the fall of the Roman Empire was pharmacon, which is drug farming that's the word they used ritually formulaically to describe wine because it was routinely spiked with toxins and herbs and plants now was this just when they were having these rituals but when they were eating they would just drink wine normally right? There was every day table wine like we have today right but it was more, you know, they wouldn't take two pills with a glass of water. They would dissolve their Tune into wine wine is described by Pat McGovern at UPenn. For example as the universal palliative that that that's how you would self administer medicine.


It's why diets Cortese when I mentioned in the Materia Medica from the first century ad it's why he has all these recipes a lot of them are just medicinal, you know, not not all of them resulted in these fantastic Visions when he talked about your swollen genitals. It's because he was trying to offer a recipe for that and that goes back hundreds and hundreds of years into the Greek tradition, but The interesting part of it is that if you go all the way back to Homer 8th 7th Century BC, you do find this other kind of wine being mixed wine for a ritualistic purposes like Searcy the famous which the daughter of Hecate who we found in Spain. So seriously is routinely again mixing Homer calls it Fateh Makkah looga evil drugs into the wine and you could also mix healing drugs into the wine, but there were there was essentially a whole pharmacopoeia.


Available to them wow. But thank God you wrote this book man. There's more. Okay, there's more, you know, there's more there's more PJ. Okay, so when we're not just looking, okay. So for a long long time, it's been the literature. It's been you know, Vaz and pottery it's been statuary like the Borghese of Oz I was entered the whole point. I wrote this book is again to apply 21st century science to it. So in my conversations with Pat McGovern, And Andrew Co at MIT. I started to find the initial clues for actual wine.


That was actually spiked. Okay, not just not just in the abstract So Jamie if you open this up real quick to graveyard wine, which is how I refer to it. So if you look at graveyard wine go to the number scorpion wine right there. So I was looking for evidence of wine actually being spiked in Antiquity. This comes from Egypt. This is at a by dose 3150 BC. It's so old it's predates pre-dynastic. This is Scorpion the first they found 700 wine jars that were subjected to chemical analysis Pat McGovern did the testing and they found it to be spiked with Savory wormwood blue 10z bomb Senna coriander germander mint sage and Thyme.


whoa And you can find that he published that in 2009. I believe ancient Egyptian herbal wines and wormwood is some type of psychedelic. I thought that to it it's not it's not it is Artemisia absinthium is a psychoactive McGovern thinks this was Artemisia sabeti, which is a slightly different species. But when you look at it from from afar, there's something more than just table wine. They're not be these were intentionally spiking the wine for a reason and Are deposited as Grave goods for a reason and the reason would seem to be for ushering the prefab Arrow into the Afterlife they were there with him to Aid the journey and we're not going to talk about the underworld journey in Egypt with Graham Hancock without asking Graham Hancock what he thinks about ancient Egyptian funerary practice.


Well, there's no doubt that the the ancient Egyptians were very focused on death not in a negative way they saw So this life as our opportunity to prepare for the adventure and the challenge of death that we had whatever years we got 70 90 year 20 over many years. We got that was our opportunity to prepare for that great challenge of the journey that follows that follows death and there's no doubt in my mind that the ancient Egyptians did make use of psychedelic substances the the blue water lily from Ancient Egypt being being an example jars of that again diluted in wine were found in the Tomb of Tutankhamun moon.


This is a psychedelic brew. And and when you look at ancient Egyptian art the the entities which are very often part animal part human in form and which are teachers of mankind you find yourself again in that same realm that people using psychedelics today find themselves in DMT in particular encountering entities that speak to us that teach us that often take the form of part animal part human very anthropoids. It's so interesting to see the actual evidence of this use and when do egyptologist dismiss this to they Embrace this is this something that is not controversial.


I think agent egyptologist will say that the ancient Egyptians were neurotically focused on death. I would say I would say the opposite I would say they had a very balanced approach to death. I mean, the one thing is clear it we're all going to die. This is nobody nobody doubts. That sooner or later that moment in our life is going to come where life ends and to me that is an incredibly important moment and the ancient Egyptians by devoting their culture to figuring out how we live best in order to cross that bridge to Transit into that other realm where we're being very practical and very profound in their inquiries.


It wasn't that they were afraid of death. They wanted to ready themselves for the journey that follows is death and they made it and they made it very clear that everything we do in this life. Everything counts. Nothing is separated away. There's nothing that we can deny. There's complete Clarity in the afterlife realm. Nothing can be nothing can be hidden. We're confronted with absolute truth and in a way psychedelics are a preparation for that because psychedelics also confront us with absolute truth and that's why psychedelics can often be very uncomfortable because we see the truth about ourselves, but we've been given an opportunity. To change ourselves for the better and to be more nurturing and more positive and more useful people and as a result the ancient Egyptians would say to have to confront a better death when I was getting out was what is their reaction to the psychedelically spiked one because I know you particular agent reggaeton just don't want anything to do with psychedelics.


That's what I don't want anything to do with psychedelics. They would prefer not to not to go there and I just as there are many Other aspects of ancient Egyptian culture that the egyptologists don't want to go into it often seems to me that they're in the process of trying to carve or shape ancient Egypt to fit into modern ideology. And that's a great pity. Well, it's also great pity that mean particularly with your work and the work that you've done with. Dr. Robert schoch it describing some indications on some of the ancient structures that there was Heavy erosion that was due to rain. Thousands of years of rainfall which would have predated the the conventional idea of when these things are constructed the way that they resisted that instead of looking at it like this fascinating new evidence that will illuminate this field.


And now we have some new perspective on this they rejected it so horrific lie, and they would so they were mocking. I remember that who's that that one egyptologist that openly mocked the the concept of it? But not just one meant that many many egyptologists about there's a film in the one that there was a the documents that are maybe yes the Charlton Heston narrated the documentary. Yes. I think you may be you may be speaking about confetti. But really I could I could cite a dozen egyptologists who feel this way. The notion that the Great Sphinx is 12 and a half thousand years old, which is an ocean based on the erosion patterns on the body of the Sphinx is utterly unacceptable to me.


Told you if they just don't want to go there. They don't want to consider that possibility because they feel that they've got ancient Egyptian history taped that it begins about 5,000 years ago. There's a bit of a precursor in the pre-dynastic period a thousand or so years building up to ancient Egypt and then you have ancient Egyptian civilization and gradually it merges with the Greeks and with other cultures and spreads out around the world. The notion that there is a background to ancient Egyptian civilization that goes back into the ice age is a nose ocean that no egyptologist is prepared to accept the moment. They start accepting that notion. They ceased to be egyptologists in the view of their colleagues as a very dangerous idea to to contemplate and that that's why I spent the last quarter of a century trying to argue the case for A Lost Civilization, but you know, maybe I'm not right about everything but we shouldn't neglect the hints and the clues whether it comes from astronomy whether it comes from geometry whether it comes from Geology whether it comes from the statements of the ancient Egyptians themselves about their Origins and their past we shouldn't be ignoring this we should consider it and you're right rather than rather than reacting with Fury to the notion of a much more ancient Sphinx.


It would have been nice to have seen the egyptological profession react with interest to it and begin to explore it and consider what it might mean because the geology is irrefutable but largely ignored the erosion. Was it on the body of the Sphinx, or was it on? The walls of the temple where the Sphinx was carved out of well where you can see it today is practices so that the Sphinx is carved out of solid Bedrock. It's carved out of the Bedrock of the Giza plateau. And in order to do that and enormous trench was created around the body of the Sphinx. And in fact the the blocks that were excavated from that trench were then moved over and used to build what a called the valley Temple and the Sphinx Temple where in some cases you find blocks of limestone that way Is to 200 tons and and what has happened since then is that the body of the Sphinx has been subjected to multiple restorations.


In fact, one of the arguments that egyptologists just ignore is that he already in the Old Kingdom at the time when the Sphinx is supposed to have been made according to Conventional egyptology already in the Old Kingdom. They were restoring it and there are restoration blocks on the body of the Sphinx that date back four and a half. Half thousand years and that process of restoring and renovating. The Sphinx has gone on down the ages. It's still happening today the paws of the Sphinx as we see them today are covered entirely with modern restoration blocks. We don't see the Bedrock underneath it. But where we do see the original Bedrock is in the walls of that trench that was carved out to create the body of the Sphinx in the first place because nobody's been restoring those and it's in those that you see this characteristic.


Think pattern that speaks of exposure to a very long period of heavy heavy rainfall. And the last time you have that heavy rainfall in Egypt is the period that geologist call the younger dryas roughly between twelve thousand eight hundred and eleven thousand six hundred years ago. So the body of the Sphinx the trench out of which it is carved is saying I am 12,000 years old and the only argument against that really is the head of the Sphinx being the typical head of an ancient Egyptian. Error with the nemus headdress, but of course the head of the Sphinx was originally a lion just as the body of the Sphinx is a lion and the head of the Sphinx was recarved in dynastic times to give it this human form the reaction to that notion and the this hard geological data that Robert schoch provided was just the most extreme present.


Let's pay tribute to John Anthony West. Yes, because it was John Anthony West who originally had that brilliant insight. That that what we're looking at on the in the case of the Sphinx is water weathering and in and he rightly pays tributes to swallow de lubic said earlier scholar who was the first to notice this and John them brought Robert shop to Egypt as a professional geologist. Robert is Professor of geology at the University of Boston and brought him there and Robert schoch indeed concluded that we are looking at Water weathering on the body of the Sphinx and gradually Robert initially. He's very cautious. He was saying well the Sphinx must be seven or eight thousand years old, but much more recently.


He's also settled on the date of roughly 12,000 years old as the last time that you would get that sort of heavy rainfall in Egypt that could have created that characteristic weathering and I would encourage anybody who's interested in this to please check out John Anthony West magical Egypt series because it's amazing. It's yeah, I probably seen it 15 times its so I'm so glad that you had that you had John on your show. Joe because you did also very I know it's very rare that you do things by Skype and you will see it in person as well I had about you twice. Yeah, I got him on in person and before he died and I had them on Skype before that. What an amazing man. He was such a radical such an incendiary, you know, just planting planting intellectual bombs in the accepted wisdom of the modern world and making us all think again.


So I think when it comes to the age of the Sphinx, it's really important. Oughtn't to realize the role that John Anthony West played and I'm I'm so glad that you had him on your show. Yeah, I am as wife if he was a dear dear friend of mine and I was I was I was with him just a month before his before his death and he went into that journey of death with enormous courage and absolute certainty. Now when these vessels were tested and these psychedelic compounds were detected. What was the reaction was was their resistance to this what how It received we don't think they're properly psychedelic just yet means all the ingredients that that psychoactive psychoactive medicinal for sure.


It gets there wasn't much backlash that I know of after after McGovern study. It was a gold standard study and then it continued by the way. So after those 700 jars at abydos after further analysis, they they determined that the the plants and herbs actually originated in the holy land and the southern Levant they weren't native to eat. Egypt they had been brought there or they were shipped there by the folks in the Holy Land which gets more interesting because the next big find was the world's oldest Wine Cellar, which is published in 2014. It came from Tel kabri, which is also in Galilee. Remember this is going to be the same Galilee that Jesus comes on the scene and Christianity bursts across the planet. So at Tel kabri in 2014, they found another stash of wine dubbed the world's oldest Wine Cellar also subjected to archeo chemical analysis and what Calling the team there found was wind spiked with honey storax.


Terebinth Cyprus Cedar Juniper mint Myrtle and cinnamon or at least cinnamaldehyde hmm another very strange mixture doesn't sound very psychedelic though. No, no. No, so they just they just ran into spiking wine. They just they love spiky one. But what Andrew Cole says about it is interesting though, and that's that's why I reached out to him originally. Lie, because he says that spiking wine with this many ingredients is indicative of a very sophisticated understanding of the Botanical landscape and he says he says quote it demonstrates the Pharma kopeeks skills necessary to balance preservation palatability and psychoactivity.


He uses that word preservation like in the terebinth for example, you know resonating the wind so it doesn't spoil to vinegar and then palatability if there is cinnamon or honey that you mentioned before too. Improve the flavor profile but then psychoactivity who knows we don't know which Juniper it was but there is Juniper used in other psychoactive ceremonies. There's there's a species of juniper juniperus the Cordova which occurs in near the himaiayas actually and there's I've seen videos really cool videos if you want to pull it up Jamie you can look up if you Google anybody can do this GB Shaman if you look up GB space Shaman you'll see a ritual of someone inhaling the the Juniper the incense from juniper and going into trance.


Well, how much is written about wine and the additives and all the different things? They put 2 1 Let's watch this first. There's there's not much written about it. You might have to to skip forward but this is them essentially preparing. What are we looking at? So that's that's a that's a big top what they call the pit. Taiyo the patio are their traditional healer profits and and and shamans of this tribe in the Hindu Kush and what they do is they inhale the incense from burning Juniper and then suck the blood from a goat head.


Wow, Jesus Christ and it says the things people get up to that's what happens when you out lost like a dog's people try anything. It's even mushrooms. Yeah, sucker. Go ahead. And so there is it the homes of people and it says it puts him into a trance whereby he is able to communicate with the fairies. When you that guy skeptical guys always been annoying look at them. He just wants to put on a robe and dance and he kind of looks like a guy would do that too. And there's there's endless go ahead. Go at exactly boy.


Hey boy. And what is there a do they explain? Oh here he goes. He's sucking on the goat head. Okay. This guy's annoying. Look at them. Look at those dancing and he's putting on a show. Everybody's like look at him. He's like look at me so I can let go now. I'm so crazy. I bet to go ahead doesn't really do anything. I bet to go ahead is just so he gets extra attention. Look at the kids. Like wow. This guy's crazy. Yeah a little bit of bore out in there, too. Wow, okay. Now is it usually more than one person. This is what's odd is that this one guy is tripping balls and then he collapses and then everybody else is just going on with Marty.


Look at Marty crazy. He's got to rinse his hands off. Hmm. And is this something that other people this is what's so weird about this video. It seems like one person is having a psychedelic ritual and the rest of them are just watching this guy. He was the spiritual technician the way you find another traditional societies. He was the one who trained to navigate that that other world and learn the fairy language apparently very language the fairy language. Hmm. Yeah, it is weird those fairies and elves and all these different things exist and so many different cultures and they are Our what you do see if you do take enough psychedelics or the right kind the right setting.


Is that true. Wow. My mentor is true my take on this when I wrote Supernatural is that where you know, we have three supposedly different domains of experience. We have the spirits who shamans encounter in Altered States Of Consciousness. We have fairies and elves from the Middle Ages very often in illustration. As you'll see that the mushrooms mushrooms are present in the illustrations. And then today we have aliens and at the level of phenomena the there are extremely close similarities between the entities that we call aliens today the entities that were called fairies or elves in the Middle Ages and the entities that shamans referred to as spirits and I would say actually what we're dealing with is the same experience in all three cases, but dude through Different cultural lenses and and construed in different ways and the only thing that really explains these kind of experiences where any one of us can actually share that experience and have that experience is psychedelics powerful psychedelics, like DMT will plunge us into that realm of experience and we will meet entities and many people did they do construe those entities as aliens because that's how our culture is dealing with the other today.


Have you ever experienced anything that act like what the the classic iconic alien is? Yeah. I have you have real absolutely and one of my in one of my early Ayahuasca experiences in the in the Amazon. I saw flying's my eyes were closed but I saw flying saucers and then I saw this classic sort of quote unquote gray with that high domed forehead and narrow pointed chin and these really Grim eyes. I'm looking down on me. I think I may have missed this on your show before but what I what I really regret doing I felt I was going to be taken I felt I was going to be abducted and I opened my eyes and I shouted no, of course they were course.


I should have kept my eyes closed and said yes take me but I didn't do that and I've never encountered them in that quite alien form again. That's a bummer. Yes. It is a bummer. But with that we have to we have to consider the possibility that these are not simply concoctions of our brains that the brain is a much more complicated mechanism than we think it is and that in certain circumstances when brain chemistry is altered in the right way, we gain access to other levels of reality that are normally closed off to our senses. That is personally my view that what's happening with I can't prove that that's the case.


But the the sense that we are entering a seamlessly convincing parallel world that it is inhabited by intelligent beings and that they have things to say to us. First of all, this is universal people have worked with psychedelics all around the world have had those experiences. And secondly, I just don't see this. I don't see why we've all got a brain module for this. I think we are actually peering through the doorway into another level of reality, but it's going to take a whole lot more research to prove that. That's just Just my own personal opinion my personal opinion mirrors yours. My feelings have always been when I do psychedelics have tuned into a frequency. That's unavailable to me during regular States Of Consciousness. It doesn't seem like a hallucination.


It seems like I entered into a doorway and I'm in a new place and I there's an urgency to it because I know that I'm not going to be able to stay here for very long because I'm they seem to know that and they seem to be they seem to communicate with you in a very urgent way and One of the things that I've talked about I've talked about this experience before one of the most profound ones. I met Jesters who are giving me you were giving me the finger and yeah, they seem they seem to be explaining to me that I take myself too. Seriously. Yeah, it felt like and and then when I went okay they went. Yeah. Yeah, you got it. You got it. I was like, oh, yeah, you're right.


It wasn't feeling like oh, yeah. Yeah. Okay. You think of yourself too, highly? I had my what's white asset that the subtitle of my book Supernatural back in 2006 was meetings with the ancient teachers of mankind. And I think that's what's going on here. I think that the psychedelics allow us to enter a realm where we encountered teachers who can help us to be better people and perhaps to be a better civilization. Well, that was one of the more interesting things about I believe it was University of Jerusalem there their take on what Moses in the Burning Bush was Yeah, very likely The Burning Bush was the acacia tree, which is very rich in dimethyltryptamine DMT.


Yeah, and that this was what mean it when you say it that way like oh, of course Moses and the burning bush was God talking to him and you think about the translation between ancient Hebrew and then to Latin and Greek and all these and then the English eventually, like of course, there's going to be a lot lost in the translation, but if you just looked at It that way you'd like. Oh, so that's a psychedelic drug. Of course you done that always you do you kind of do meet something that seems like even if you promise God and it's very moral. Yeah you made that you meet in what other state of consciousness do you meet intelligent plants that communicate with you, right?


You know, that's the the it's very hard to imagine any other state of consciousness apart from the Psychedelic State and what you're citing is the work of Benny Shannon who is a professor at the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, and he has drunk, Iowa. GE himself at least 700 times. I mean, he's got his suspect and he's a he's a great piece exactly any any scholar who goes into this area and really does it properly faces skepticism and being shoved off to the side by his or her colleagues it takes courage to do this work. But what we need is more scientists doing this work girding up their courage and getting on with it because we need to learn about this.


Aspect of ourselves. We just got such an incomplete picture at the moment, but it all falls into place. If you look at it under that description and I'm glad he has the courage to step up and actually put this description out there. So I remember someone sent it to me in an email and I was like, haha like there it is course and it Bennett venitian Allen's book is called I Ayahuasca the antipodes of the mind. It's really important really important piece of work, but not widely enough. In my view, is there a cultural version of Ayahuasca where there is an MAO inhibitor and a plant with dimethyltryptamine outside of the Amazon?


Is there an equivalent? Well sure what that was. That was also part of Benny Shannon's argument in the in ancient Israel that that you have you have a mimosa certain mimosas which which contain the DMT. And then you have harm allene in in other plants that contain the monoamine oxidase inhibitor. So you can have these what are called Ayahuasca analogs which are which are doing essentially the same the same thing. I've I've consumed Ayahuasca analogs myself and they are very like Ayahuasca but not quite there is a there is a there is a difference that again.


I'm going to sound very mystical and kind of whoo here, but there is a spirit. In Ayahuasca, it's a female Spirit. There's a goddess and I've not encountered her with the analogs only with Ayahuasca from the Amazon and what have the analogues been like the site. The experience is still psychedelic. Yes very much. So the the Visions the encounters the encounters with entities the amazing geometric patterns and the self-reflection. What the fuck have I been doing with my life up till now, but it decided I make that mistake. Why did I hurt that person in that way, but that that That feeling of a direct intimate encounter with a I call her a goddess. I mean, sometimes she appears in and I can hear my critics out there laughing at me now Hancock has completely lost it but sometimes she appears to appears in the form of a human woman sometimes in the form of a serpent and then you know, we get into the whole issue of the Garden of Eden and the story of the Garden of Eden and the role that the serpent plays in that story and the role that the serpent plays in that story is pointing out to Adam and Eve.


God has basically lied to them and he offers them he offers Adam and Eve the forbidden fruit Alex Gray my friend the Visionary artist Alex Gray calls it the first psychedelics lap down. That's what the Garden of Eden is. So, you know, there are these intriguing experiences that are Unleashed with these with these substances, but to my mind there is something very special about Ayahuasca and it's a living ancient technology. You can trace it back. Tens of years in the Amazon and it's now coming out of the Amazon and finding its way around the world and that ancient Fresco that shows Adam and Eve standing by mushrooms.


It's very bizarre as well. Right? Yeah. Absolutely. I again this our psychedelic Heritage has been hidden from us and that is why I value Brian's book The immortality key so much because it's done the solid scientific ground work to begin to give academic. Scientists permission to investigate this field and that's what we need. We need much more work done in this field than has been done already. Whew, man, how good does it feel to have put this down to paper and just set a due or do you feel like now that it's out there you have a lot of explaining to do I think there's lots of explaining to do.


Yeah, it's funny though. When we haven't gotten into the too much of the Christian material yet, but I went through the Vatican quite a bit when I when I was writing this with different departments at the Vatican the Vatican secret archives and the archive of the congregation for the Doctrine of the faith and the Vatican Museums and all the catacombs in Rome and I went through their spelunking with Father Francis and to be totally honest the Vatican couldn't have been nicer or more accommodating to me and while some of this is controversial they've been very supportive to date and I say that as someone who went to 13 years of Catholic School including four years with the Jesuits, they always encouraged me to ask questions about the origins of the faith and there's lots and lots of questions there.


There's a reason that today you can look around and find 33000 denominations of Christianity. I think that was the case from the very beginning there was never one monolithic form of the faith and people didn't go to bed in 33 ad as pagans and wake up in 34 ad as Christians. It was a process and Intercultural process that took hundreds of years, which I call paleo Christianity, which I think for anyone interested in the faith is kind of the most interesting part. These are the earliest and most authentic Christians, but they were living in a world Where the blood of goats and all this spiked wine was the norm and as a matter of fact, dr. Martin Luther King jr. Wrote about this of all people the really yeah.


This is called the Pagan continuity hypothesis. The idea that Christianity wasn't born in a vacuum in 1950. Dr. King wrote a paper called the influence of the mystery religions on Christianity. You can Google it you can Google it and you can Google it and you can read it. This was this this was not controversial woowoo stuff at least in When I went to the Vatican, I was really fortunate. We hired a professional guide who was a professor. There. It is the influence of the mystery religions and Christianity. Dr. Martin Luther King. Wow impressive. It's amazing. We got really fortunately this amazing guide and we were in the middle of this one area of the Vatican and there was a giant pine cone.


Yeah, and of course deal opinion. Yeah, and so he brought it up. Like what do you think that stands for? And I said probably the pineal gland and his eyes lit up and we had this conversation and then start talking about drug, you know too much so Rogan and so he just loved the fact that I knew that and then I was into this and then we had a fantastic time but there's a lot of mushroom imagery and iconic mushroom shapes and and and this connection between mushrooms and Christianity. You can find it there are there's a lot of One of the weirder ones when Jack Herer was alive. He was working on Jack her was a guy who was a Goldwater Republican.


It became a cannabis Advocate when he he got divorced made it met a girlfriend and he thought pot was for losers, but he just want to get high with this cute girl and smokes a little pot is like where has this been all my life? Holy shit, and then he became a cannabis Advocate and I was very fortunate to meet him before he died and he was showing me some stuff that he was working on but one of the things that he was working on. Don after he wrote that book The Emperor wears no clothes, but then he wrote he was writing a book about mushrooms and Christianity and there was these ancient images of these naked people dancing in ecstasy and they were surrounded by this translucent mushroom image. It was really fascinating and there was a lot of these images and images that were the shape of doors that were carved out in the form of a mushroom and that this it only makes sense.


If you know what psychedelic mushrooms do when you take them you you have these incredible experiences and the idea that a religion would emerge out of these experiences Is Not Unusual at all know, especially if it was common in ancient Greece that that's that's why I try to focus on that that continuity from the ancient Greeks to the Christians because again, these are the same people the earliest Christians were all Greek speaking when Paul is writing his letters, which is the majority of the New Testament. Estimate the 21 of the 27 books of the New Testament. He's writing in Greek to Greek people. He's writing to the Corinthians who speak Greek the Thessalonians and Thessaloniki. Now the second largest city in Greek and grease the Philippians and then in modern-day turkey to the Ephesians and Colossians and Galatians, you know, Christianity is born in Galilee or at least grows up in Galilee, but it doesn't take root there.


It goes It goes to the Greek speakers and it goes across all the Greek influence areas including Magna Grecia, which is Greece which is southern Italy which happens to be the same place where the Catholic Church put down its roots 2,000 years ago. They're the reason for that was because the early church was all Greek and these were people who were steeped in The traditions of their ancestors. I mean imagine abandoning the religion of your grandparents for this new wine God from one day to the next it doesn't doesn't make that much sense. And so the thesis of the book is that the Eucharist for some communities at some point in time at some Um area and this Greek speaking part of the world would have availed themselves of the kind of sacraments that were available to the Greeks for generations and generations.


And so we're still looking for the Smoking Gun of that that ancient Greek spiked wine. It's not there. We talked about the abide all swine in Egypt the the the herbal wine from tell cavity in Galilee. So we've been looking in Greece and Turkey and Italy and Elsewhere for that, you know Greek spiked wine and haven't quite found it yet. But Andrew Co is very interested in continuing. Doing two tests and find more things. But in the meantime, we did find spiked wine. So you have evidence of Spike wine. Now, it's just fine to get in Greece. I think we want you want to find it in Greece to tie to Dionysus. You want to find it in Italy to tie it to the Christians because that's really the area where the church again puts down roots and begins to grow up in that period of paleo Christianity.


And so just like I was looking for that erga ties beer. I was looking for evidence of where you could properly call it. Psychedelic wine may have popped up and there is one article and one archeo botany journal from 20 years ago that talks about Spike wine, which was news which was news to me too. Because every single time I go to the pet McGovern's and and roukoz and all the top archeo botanist and Europe the answer you get back just like the answer to the question. Where is the spiked beer? The answer is there isn't any and it's another case of this evidence just either being ignored or underreported but there was a Young at the time archeo botanist Marina chatter Aldi who is from Naples and got her PhD in archaeology in the UK and she's on site in Pompeii testing these vessels.


We have a lot of evidence from Pompeii, by the way. In fact, a lot of what we know about the ancient world comes from Pompeii and Herculaneum because of Mount Vesuvius in 79 ad it explodes and destroys everything but it also preserves everything under like 17 feet of volcanic. Ash. We have all these Clues. Lose about the dionysian Mysteries. And in addition to that there was this farmhouse in scafati just to the east of Pompeii where there were seven dolia, which is like a giant storage vessel and these dolia are found in a helluva Nadia like a wine cellar and a farm that also came complete with a tour cool arrium like a wine press and a threshing floor.


So something about wine was happening in this place. We don't know what the sample was extraordinarily well-preserved. When Marino went in there, it wasn't a chemical analysis. That's obviously more fine more finely grated. The the sample was in such good shape because it had been waterlogged. So the the Botanical samples were in pristine condition and she could tell by the seeds and stems and other plant material what was there and there were over 50 species of plants and herbs and trees in this in this one sample, which is really weird even more than we found that abide also tell cobby it was you know, like a Just a melange of plant material that shouldn't be there and what she found in addition to many other medicinal plants was opium cannabis henbane and black Nightshade.


What is henbane? Henbane is the is he he was Hummus. It's a high-risk. I mean is one of those tropane alkaloids the the that Nightshade plant that very witchy kind of plan that we found in the cabin office in Spain that it was beer potentially spiked with henbane. So we're finding wine spiked potentially with henbane. We find four seeds at least there were two seeds of opium 9 seeds of cannabis for seeds of henbane and then two seeds of this black Nightshade and in the article that describes it she Marina herself. The archaea botanist says this is some kind of spiced wine. In fact, she calls it a myth adopt him now to understand that there was this guy Mithra Dotty's myth or Dottie's the sixth was the ruler of the pontus region and between the black and Caspian Seas.


His father was poisoned to death and so So to prevent that he would microdose his whole life. He was poisoning himself day in and day out. And so this potion of many different toxic herbs and plants becomes known eventually and the Roman Empire as a Mitzvah Dottie mm after mithridates. He's now when the Romans finally get to him and try and kill him he tries to poison himself and it doesn't work because he's immune so one of his soldiers has to stab him to death So he's micro dosing himself in preparation for someone else poisoning exactly. Then when he tries to commit suicide he's unable to exactly oh my God.


Hmm, how strange and so outside of Pompeii. Was there any other evidence and how would you go about finding it? Like we're like say if you want to continue the search, where would you look that's the I mean it opens up a whole world of possibilities. Now that people I mean I wrote this as kind of I call them the Initial archaea Botanical blips on the radar so between the surgut eyes beer and this potentially psychedelic wine, there's lots of different places to look if you're trying to prove that this psychedelic hypothesis with in paleo Christianity, you're looking for a place where the dionysian Mysteries bumped up against the Christian Mysteries and that's all over the place. So back in Galilee, for example, Dionysus.


There's there's a whole myth around Dionysus and his birth and different authors places birth and different places one of the Aces they places birth is a city called ski fell police ski thought police was like the capital of the deck IO police this Tent City part of the Eastern Mediterranean from Nazareth to ski thought police today is 40 minutes door to door Nazareth where Jesus grows up. So ski topless has this Northern Cemetery where you do find artifacts that relate both to the Pagan. Dyneisha Mysteries and some Christian artifacts. So a place like that would be ripe for further investigation or an Phasis you have like The Grotto of the seven sleepers another place where the Pagan Mysteries bumped up against the Christian Mysteries.


One of the best places is Rome and the cat and the catacombs which is why I spent so much time going through the catacombs looking for evidence of these essentially funerary rituals were people were celebrating with the dead using the sacramental wine in the very earliest versions of the mess. And is there any Scripture and he's any texts that are describing what they were doing? Doing when they're going through these rituals these funeral rituals. I mean, there's a few things we have. So the the funeral for the Christians. It's called The Refuge area. Mmm, the referee Jerry. Mm and Latin means like a chill out and there's there's a very respectable scholar Ramsey McMullen. He's considered one of the Premier authorities of the ancient Roman world.


He describes the Refuge area. Mm as a place where the dead themselves participate and it's where the the dead basically come back to life. In the Roman world, you would all you would never leave the dead alone think of think of it like like a funeral ritual in Mexico. For example, when the family goes to visit the graves of the ancestors, there was a very similar principle in the ancient Roman world that carried over into Christianity. And so we know the referee Jerry mm existed the big question is if the wine drunk at the river Jerry mm was similar to the wine of the early Christian Eucharist, and when you look through these catacombs you find really crazy stuff to suggest that in fact The to could the to could coexist.


Wow, here we go. These images now the books out the books done. Your thing now is obviously promoting this and getting the word out. But do you have in your mind of following up on this research now that the doors opened and now the people are aware of this it seems like your first of all I believe you're going to get help people are going to be interested in continuing this research and and contributing to this research. Where do you go from here? I want to dedicate my life to this for the next 10 years. Really? Yes. Wow, so PJ field. PJ's too happy no, I think well really like we need to take you down to the Amazon Brian and you need to have an encounter with Mother Ayahuasca or you just got a Santa Cruz like he could just really happened about that rain forest though.


Yeah. I'm sure it really is. It really is a special setting for this for this experience, but I think it would be interesting Brian having having written this as a Difficult and academic and research exercise to to them go on to see what your personal experiences and how that resonates with what you've learned as a scientific investigator. Yeah. I mean, even if you wanted to do it in a clinical setting like Rick Strassman did when he had these FDA approved studies for DMT The Spirit Molecule, which is anything is anything where you could tap into that world because I guarantee you you're going to come back eyes wide like those ladies in that drawing. And I'm like, oh, okay.


It's fascinating to me when you talk to someone who is a psychedelic virgin because you almost feel jealous like almost like, you know, do you feel the same way Graham? Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. It would be it would be nice to it would be nice to know that that experience lay ahead of us. Yeah. We haven't we haven't had it yet. But but you know at the same time you can learn to work with these substances. They can be overwhelming at first. And with with more careful use of these substances you begin to manage them better not always but usually So when you say you want to do this and dedicate your life for the next 10 years, are you do you have multiple books in mind do you have what is your thought?


So with this? I mean my my dream is to see this on the screen. I think there's there's so many visual elements here. I think the what's up Jamie? Oh, sorry. Sorry. Okay, sorry, so. The I think the the best way that I mean my dream is to see this on the screen. So I've been talking to a couple of development teams couple production companies one is an anonymous content and Ela and six West media in New York together were developing a documentary series that adapts this everything we've talked about for like a first season but there's really multiple Seasons here because there's so much evidence that's never been looked at and so it's taking the very best of the archeo chemistry and the very best of the on In the field archaeology combining all the linguistic evidence and the symbology and iconography and putting it together to find once and for all the Smoking Gun for the use of a psychedelic Eucharist in Antiquity.


So are you do you have a place where you bringing this or we are just about to pitch this as a matter of fact Netflix where yeah. Yeah. Listen, I would watch that all day long. I'm really excited. I'm really excited about the whole thing the whole Prospect of it and I think that it's I'm just so happy that you became obsessed with it and they ignored all the people telling you to not me too, man. I mean, it's been a it's been a long road. I never never thought about psychedelics until I read Supernatural a lot of weird stuff was happening in my life and 2007 2008 after I read those initial studies that came out of Hopkins and NYU.


Of course. I wanted to try psilocybin and then the mystery just got deeper and deeper and I There was there was a story to be told here that hadn't been told before and I think it needed a serious and sober look at this stuff. So I really did spend nights and weekends doing nothing else but this kind of stuff and reading hundreds of books and thousands of Journal articles and 12 years of Googling to try and put all these pieces together and I will say that you know, it covers a lot of ground but you don't need to know anything about history or archaeology. Let alone archeo botany archeo chemistry. A or psychopharmacology or biblical studies or paleoanthropology to appreciate this because I kind of take it one step at a time from the very beginning and show you every piece of evidence that I mean as a virgin did convince me that this is at least worth a sober look from the scientific Community.


Well, I hope to things next time I talk to you were promoting this television show and you could tell me about your psychedelic experience that you have with graham. Did I agree to this over here? To us you agree signed up you signed up bro and Graham the hope I'm hopefully next time we communicated will actually be in the flesh and the somebody works out this covid-19 sense. Hope I hope so. Can I can I just mention would not talk about my book, but could this is the hardback of America before which we which we talked about the last time I was on your show and America before has been in hardback for the past 18 months, but it's coming out in paperback.


9th of September 20 20 atom at a much reduced price and I hope that people have not been able to access the hardback will be able to have a look at it in the in the paper bag. I mean we had we had an amazing conversation. The last time I was on your show and before that we had the drama with Michael Shermer rattle Carson was present and that guide Mark defendant came in by telephone and I want to pay tribute to Michael Shermer you may Notice this Joe that that Michael put out a tweet saying that he was going to have to reconsider his essentially I'm I'm paraphrasing he was going to have to reconsider his prior attitude to my work in the light of new evidence about the younger dryas impact catastrophe that in my view 12,000 years ago or so lost us a whole civilization.


It takes a lot to admit that that one may have been wrong and I'm glad that Michael had had the courage. Judge to put that tweet out there. Yeah, I am as well kudos to him and kudos to you and Randall Carlson as well because those two conversations that we had about that are absolutely some of my favorite conversations of all time. Those were it's obvious that something happened and it all the pieces much like this in this conversation about spiked wine and drugs and it all makes sense it all fits into place and that we are a species with amnesia and that we need to We need to ReDiscover our pasta. There's a curious resonance with the way that things are in the in the modern world.


Just as I have come to mistrust history to missed trust the history that is taught to us in schools and universities no longer to accept at face value the opinions of so-called experts in the field. So in the modern world today many people are learning to mistrust institutions that have long gone unquestioned whether it's government or whether it's science be people are beginning to think for themselves. And I think there's an intriguing resonance between recovering our lost past and regaining sovereignty over ourselves in a modern world that is struggling very hard to turn us all into children and rest all responsibility in government a huge mistake governments are there to service they are not there to rule us.


They are not there to tell us what to do and I'm glad that people are waking up to this here here. That's an excellent way to end this Thank you Graham. I love you. I appreciate you very much. I wish you were here right now. I'd give you a big hug, and thank you Brian give you back. Thanks. Thank you. All right. Thank you guys. And thank you everybody listening. Goodbye. Thank you friends for tuning into the show. And thank you to Simply say Simply Safe and they're awesome home security can be got by you for just fifteen bucks a month US News and World Report named it the best overall home security of 2020 head, too. Simply saved.com Rogan and get a free HD camera for the listeners of this podcast that Simply Save.com Rogan go there to make sure that they know we sent you.


Thank you also to the motherfucking cash app. That's right the motherfucking cash app. The number one app in finance in all the land download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. And when you do download the cash app, make sure you enter the referral. Joe Rogan all one word, you will receive $10 and the cash app will send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Ren's fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo. Whoo. We are also brought to you by rev Town jeans. My absolute all-time favorite jeans.


I wear them every time I wear jeans because they are in fact the shit pick up a pair at Red town.com. Rogan go there and upgrade your denim game today. That's rev Town.com Rogan. I'm telling you they are literally the I hate when people say literally but they're the fucking best jeans on Earth and thank you also to whoop the best fitness tracker I've ever used in my life. I wear it every single day. I love all the information that it gives me it helps me make healthy choices and it keeps me accountable and There's this podcast we're going to get the Hook-Up.


I whoop whoop. Whoop is going to offer you 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout go to whoop. That's wh oop.com and enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15% get to know yourself on a deeper level unlock yourself with whoop. All right, we did it. Thank you. How interesting was that shit, right. I told you that was a fascinating conversation. I am so into this. I love it. I love the fact. That he was obsessed and I love the fact that his wife PJ did not want him doing it and he kept doing it and look look at there. He was right, haha. So thank you to Brian and thank you to Graham. That was amazing conversation. And thank you to all you much love everybody. So thank you to Brian and thank you to Graham. That was amazing conversation. And thank you to all you much love everybody.