
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by CB D MD and they're awesome CBD products. I use their products every day. One of the things that I've been really loving is there CBD gummies. They're fantastic and CBD is amazing. It's so good for aches and pains and so good for reducing inflammation and I like the gummies because I take them and I feel like I'm eating candy, but it's actually good for me. Woohoo. They make great. Stuff first of all, they make amazing muscle rubs. CBD recover is fantastic. Just there's CBD tinctures and oils super top-notch super high quality. And then it has got a new product called CBD p.m.


CBD p.m. Blends 500 milligrams of superior CBD with sleep promoting ingredients like melatonin valerian root and chamomile to create a powerful and effective sleep aid. They just make awesome shed. I love this company and I love the variety of their X they have bath bombs, they have CBD freeze which you could it's fries with Menthol and you apply it with a roll-on and I love that because I can use it as a massage tool and dig in while I'm applying it. I'm just super impressed their product super high quality and to make it even easier for you to try CBD p.m. Or any of CBD MDS premium CBD oil products.


They're offering listeners to this podcast 25 percent off your next order when you use the promo. Momoko drogon at checkout. So once again that CBD em d.com use the promo code Rogan and save 25% off your purchase of high-quality CBD oil products from CBD MDI take their shit every day. It's top-notch. We're also brought to you by butcher box butcher box makes it easy for you to get high-quality humanely raised meat that you can trust they deliver. 100% grass-fed grass-finished beef free range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood directly to your door.


It's an awesome company with unbeatable value. The average cost is less than $6 a meal and there's a ton of flexibility. There's all sorts of box options and delivery frequencies that fit your needs and you can cancel at any time with no penalty and they offer a bunch of different options. You can choose they have five different box options you can Have for curated box options as well as the popular custom box. So you get exactly what you and your family love. What I love is 100% grass-fed grass-finished Ribeyes. They are fantastic and the value is outstanding and the quality is off the charts. I mean butcher box. They just really have it dialed in and they ship your order Frozen for freshness and packed in eco-friendly 100% recyclable boxes.


It's an awesome company and they have a sweet deal ground beef. Is back for life for a limited time new members can get two pounds of free ground beef and every butcher box order by signing up today at butcher box.com Roman. So you keep your membership and you keep that ground beef coming in for free two pounds in every butcher box. That's butcher box.com Rogan go there to get ground beef for life. We're also So brought to you by Blue Moon Blue Moon, ladies and gentlemen, I had a blue moon the other night why I was at Chuy's in Austin Texas is an awesome Tex-Mex joint and I enjoyed their steak burrito with a delicious Blue Moon.


I love Blue Moon. I've been drinking it forever. This is an easy ad for me to do. I can tell you what it says on this piece of paper, but it's just an awesome beer. It's a full flavor beer a delicious and Think of beer and you can get it delivered visit get dot Blue Moon beer and see what your delivery options are and in some areas local delivery is available in one two, three hours the name stuck after a satisfied taster said a beer this good comes around once in a blue moon. I'm a fan. It's got Valencia orange peel for subtle sweetness coriander provides balanced oats create a smooth creamy finish and it's best served in a glass with a signature.


Our orange garnish to Showcase its beautiful hazy color, but I drank it right out of the bottle and it was fucking awesome. And the next time you need a taste the extraordinary open up a blue moon get Blue Moon delivered by visit get dot Blue Moon beer.com to see your delivery options Blue Moon reach for the moon celebrate responsibly Blue Moon Brewing Company Golden Colorado ale and we're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash. App. You probably already know the cash app is the easiest way to send money between your friends and your family without having to hold on to that dirty paper.


But the cash app is also the very best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry as stacking SATs SATs is short for Satoshi Satoshi. No one knows who that really is, but it's the legendary person who created Did Bitcoin what they do know is what Bitcoin is Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority. It's an awesome way to distribute currency without the man man. And of course when you download the cash app and enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word, you will receive ten dollars and the cash app will also send.


Is to our good friend Justin Ren's fight for the Forgotten charity. So don't forget use the promo code Joe Rogan all one word. When you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. My guest today is Frank Von hippel. He is Professor of ecotoxicology at Northern Arizona University and he taught ecology field courses in over 20 countries and has conducted research in in the Americas Africa and Australia and he hosted Science History Podcast and he's also the author of the chemical age. This was a fascinating conversation.


I had it was so informative and so interesting and he's just an all-around cool human being. I really enjoyed it, please welcome Frank Von hippel. The Joe Rogan Experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Frank hi. This is a false start. That's why it's like weird right? I have to go ready and go Welcome to our polarizing Studio black people don't like it here. A lot of complaints Jamie. That's what I'm hearing from people that read the comments folks relax. We had a bang this together in a month because we moved here like literally I from the time I was saying maybe I should move to Austin to we're in Austin in studio.


It was like Two months less laughs I think it was six weeks six weeks. So all this was created. Shout out to Matt Alvarez all this was created in like two weeks. So if you think it sucks, it's okay. I like it. I think it's awesome. It's definitely weird. It's just a big shock from people that saw like, your brother was at the old studio and the old Studio was, you know, very conventional. So like a curtain and a brick wall in the American flag was like Pretty pretty normal. This is there's a big difference. Some people are bad with change. Well, you have this lovely Asian, that's Ganesh Ganesh.


That's right from India remover of obstacles. Yeah. My daughter actually went to last year as a high school in India. I bought that in Thailand actually. Okay. Yeah about in Thailand and shipped over. So what is your daughter doing India? She did her last year as a high school there. That's crazy. Yeah, why'd you do that? My oldest went to his last year as a high school in Costa Rica. I loved it. Yeah, and so she wanted to do something similar and she went to a great school called called Woodstock school, which is in the foothills of the Himalayas had a great time. That's pretty cool. Yeah, pretty Aziza Did you visit her out there? We did. Yeah multiple times. Whoo, That's gotta be weird to to be the last two years of high school 15 or 16 and 17.


Yeah, and just leave your family and be in another continent? Or don't you remember being that age and you just wanted to have some Independence and head out? Yeah. Yeah, I guess so. I think I'm so old it's hard to look back when I'm 16. I mean I have some vague memories. Well, if you're so old I'm so old I think we're born the same year 67. Yeah, they were both old. Yeah, totally. Look at my hair. It's all yeah. Well mine would be white to that it I have the side here as a pretty white now. It's very disturbing now and it comes in. I'm like whoa! Goddamn just shave it all now and my face to I'll give him a lot of gray hairs on my face to it's like you have it coming either.


A black or white? No, it's this mix father time doesn't give a fuck like sorry kid. Yeah. Tommy was actually lots of hair and it was brown and then I have my first kid and then overnight I went gray and then I had my second kid and it went white really? Yeah, that's interesting. So just just the lack of sleep stress. Yeah getting sick when you have a kid and all of that. Yeah it gets you so what's in the tube there we have a present for you. Oh, really? Yeah. Oh wow. Is this a bone? This is the human bone. Now what animal so so I'm a biologist and I brought you a gift from my home state of Alaska.


Can you figure out what it is? Well, first of all, it's fossilized. It is your right. I can tell ya because the weight yes thousands of years old. Yeah, and for people that don't have to try to explain this to one of my kids that a fossil is not the actual bone. It's a representation of the bone that's been abused or mineralize. Yeah, so I was trying to she was like wait, but it's a bone. Yeah because they have a fossil at her school. I was trying to say see how that looks not like bone. Yeah, it's because it's not really bonus. What this is what the bone the bone used to be there. And then this is the shape of the bone that's been mineralized. Yes. I love fossils are collect fossils. This is so heavy. Yeah, and I thought I'd bring you a fossil.


Let me guess I wanted to say like it's fairly thin so I would say like some sort of like a horse or something or cow, er now, deer. No, I'd give you a hint. Okay, so I got it on st. Lawrence Island Amy. And yeah, it is a bear. No, I got it on this there are polar bears there but there's no other bears but I got on st. Lawrence island in the Bering Sea where I do a lot of work and the people there are subsistence Hunters. Oh Caribou, not Caribou. No. No, there are reindeer on the island that come from Siberia, but there's no Caribou there. All right, so their subsistence Hunters their Marine Hunters so so it's like a sea and it's not a seal but your clothes horse.


Walrus. Is it? Yeah. Oh what part the baculum back to them. But if someone said I hurt my back to them and be like shut up you even know what you're talking about actually with a bone. So the baculum is a penis bone. Oh Jesus. I'm holding a big old dick way for him to set the enormous. Wow, imagine all you I was out there complaining. Okay. Thank you, sir. Yeah, thanks for people. Walrus penis. I was trying to think of what might not already have and I definitely don't have that. Yeah, look at that one. Whoa, that's crazy. Now to be from an extinct extinct. Walrus, probably I bet that's why it's extinct.


You have a ladies will I get out of here with that gonna kill me? Well, thank you Frank appreciate and thank you. Thanks for having me on the show. My pleasure. Your book The Chemical age touches on a lot of subjects that I find very fascinating particularly pesticides. I am consistently terrified of pesticides. I'm ready to a man once that I met on a ranch and he had an artificial thigh bone his Were had been replaced with like a piece of metal like a metal bone and he told me he got bone cancer from pesticides they use on a golf course that got into local water supply in a bunch of people in that area got cancer and there was like some large-scale lawsuit against the I don't know if it was against the chemical company or the golf course or both, but I remember thinking like, whoa, like I did.


Okay. I didn't even think of that like, of course if you're going To have all that green grass you have to do something about the weeds you have to do something about the bugs that all that stuff is terrifying. When when I was listening to your podcast the Science History Podcast and your friend was interviewing you who's Pete Myers Pete Myers was interviewing you and you were talking about the prevalence of these pesticides and chemicals that we use all over the world. And he said I think his exact quote was and am I wrong in saying that there's a We're centimeter of this planet. That's not somehow or another polluted. By humans in our chemicals, and you said that's accurate that's accurate.


Yeah, it's amazing. Isn't it? That's insane. Yeah, and you think of you've been to Alaska? Yeah, and you go to Alaska. It looks pristine. It's beautiful and you think everything is perfectly clean. But in fact, even the most remote places in the world like Alaska are getting atmospheric Lee deposited chemicals including pesticides that are used at lower latitude. And so there really isn't anywhere on the earth this not polluted, unfortunately and you are explaining the way these chemicals get into the atmosphere and then get distributed all over the world akin to a still like a whiskey or a moonshine still. Yeah exactly. If you go back and you look at an old an old steel the way it works you would have a heat Source like a Bunsen burner that's heating up a liquid and that liquid volatize has some of it evaporates into a gas.


And then and then that is connected via a glass tube to a glass ball that has cold water on it and that whatever vaporizes from that heat is going to condense on that cold surface where the cold water is. So that's the basics of how you would make a Distillery and the Earthworks really in the same way. So the equator is the part of the earth its most directly facing the sun is getting the most intense solar radiation. So you have these contaminants like many pesticides pcbs a lot of other things that Some add some portion of them will volatize they'll become a gas and they'll be in the atmosphere. They'll move in the atmosphere and then they'll condensed out of the atmosphere when it gets colder.


So when it's winter time and will be a little higher in latitude and the next summer they'll volatize again, they'll evaporate again and move north again is called the grasshopper effect. And so over some number of years. They move their way North when they get to the North Pole to the South Pole. Those are hemispheric sinks for these contaminants. It's cold year-round. And so the amount of deposition from the atmosphere is far greater than the amount of evaporation and therefore the the polls have the highest concentrations of certain classes of these so-called persistent organic pollutants. They're the ones that are relatively light that can move through the atmosphere as a result that and these are also fat soluble so they get into the food web.


And as you go up each food trophic level you end up with higher and higher concentrations. So the the animals with the highest concentrations of these certain kinds of Persistent organic pollutants on Earth are these high trophic level long lived animals in the Arctic like the killer whale on the polar bear that will have millions of times the background concentration of these contaminants things like DDT Mercury a lot of other chemicals. A lot of pesticides flame retardant chemicals and so on. Wow, so polar bears so and so when they they test these animals, so if the people in these areas eat these animals, are they at risk of being Infected by these contaminants or is it not at a level where it's going to harm them now?


It's a it's a really sad case of environmental Injustice because you have subsistence people's the the indigenous peoples of the Arctic that they're living off the marine environment the reading bowhead whale and walrus and I seals and polar bear and every single one of their meals, they're getting in the fat in the rendered oil. They take the blubber and they render oil which goes on to all of their meals every single meal. They're getting In terms of parts per billion of pcbs and pesticides and things like that. So it's just grossly unfair when you think about it because they never use these chemicals. They didn't benefit economically from these chemicals and yet they're subject to the some of the highest concentrations in the world and you are also saying that their breast milk is contaminated with it.


Yeah. Actually the way this whole problem was discovered was in the 1980s scientists in Canada. Wanted to understand breast milk contamination. And of women who lived in southern Canada and Industrial and agricultural areas of Canada, and so they were thinking where can we find a reference population of people who have no exposure to these chemicals. So they decided to go to Baffin Island in northeastern Canada to look at the Inuit people that live there and there are surprised to find that the the woman on Baffin Island their breast milk contain 10 to 20 times higher concentrations of chemicals like DDT and pcbs and and Mercury than the woman who lived in the industrial areas where these Chemicals were used.


So that was the first kind of global alert that actually we're poisoning. The people aren't people of the Arctic were poisoning them and that's how the rights of indigenous people in the Arctic to live in a clean environment became part of the Stockholm convention on persistent organic pollutants. There's representatives from these tribes who go to the negotiations every time it's because of this problem is called Global distillation because of this fact that it's like a still the way that it works now. Now we know this problem exists. Is there a solution that's on the table or a possible solution a theoretical solution to try to extract that? Yeah, and actually the problem is kind of twofold. So we've talked about one aspect of it, which is this atmospheric transport of contaminants, but the other aspect of it is there are also thousands of locally contaminated sites in the Arctic.


I do a lot of work on this things like formerly used defense sites from the Cold War. So the military built thousands of these US military Europe Russian military. And these sites have terrible problems with contamination and typically when the military pulled out of them. They just left everything behind we have sites. We've worked in an Alaska where there's just fields of barrels and you don't know what's in the barrels and they're leaking and and you know, you test it and you find there's there's all kinds of nasty things flame retardants and pesticides and pcbs. So in there long time been there for decades and unfortunately these chemicals many of them persist for decades. That's why they were so wonderful, you know, Pcbs were so wonderful because there were stable they could last for decades, but that's also why they're so bad because they're carcinogenic.


They disrupt the hormone system. They cause a lot of different problems. So in terms of what can we do about it? The main thing is to not be using these chemicals and to be using there's a field called Green chemistry, which seeks to instead use safe chemicals in place of these toxic chemicals, but in terms of cleaning up, yeah, there's also things to do to clean up were involved with that in some places and it's an important thing to do, but we have to stop The problem even before it gets going. When did this problem started when did human beings start using large-scale pesticides? So large-scale pesticide use started in the 1880s and at that time they were based on metals and metalloids. So naturally occurring toxic metals that would kill insects or kill fungal past things like that.


And those are actually quite dangerous things like lead and arsenic being used in in these pesticides. They were dangerous because They ended up on the food so you'd buy an apple and if you didn't wash it while you get a dose of lead poisoning that continued until about World War Two In a World War II we made a dramatic shift from using these metal based products using synthetic organic compounds. So in World War Two, we saw the origin of the organochlorine compounds and the organophosphate compounds and and and those really became the basis for pesticide use that and then there were broadcast all over the environment following World War. To and until today, so in the 1880s when they were using they're using lead and they're using arsenic.


What would it do the combating Locust? Like what were they were they trying to kill? So the very first commercial pesticide was actually copper-based pesticide and it was used in France to stop the mildew that was destroying The Vineyards and once it was found that it could destroy as it's called a water mold. Once it was found that could destroy the water mold and Save The Vineyards scientists realized you could also use Against the potato blight which had caused the famine in Ireland in the 1840s and other famines around the world. So became a very powerful tool to prevent famine and you know, one thing I like to look back on is as you can think why do people poison the world like this with these horrible things but really their motivations initially were quite positive.


They're trying to stop famine are let me just put through this devastating famine. They were trying to stop infectious diseases that were vectored by insects things like malaria and yellow fever. Fever. So the motivation was good, but unfortunately used for public health it became instead of just using it for public health. We started using it in the house and for convenience for everything. It is really crazy. When you think that the human species has been around for hundreds of thousands of years and it took till 1880 before we decided to fuck everything up a pesticides. Yeah, that's a long time and we fuck things up pretty fast because now we have a world that is like you said anywhere you go in this world.


And to find contaminated animals go to Antarctica and you measure pesticides in penguins and their eggs and you'll find very high concentrations and are they seeing health effects of the Inuit people and the people that eat these animals is it is it having a detrimental effect on them it does and in fact, the cancer rates are quite high and among the people who are subsistence hunters in the Arctic and that's really how I got involved with this kind of work is that people reported very high cancer? Rates also High rates of Developmental disorders. It could be due to these chemicals disrupting development in the womb. And and so there are groups of bring together teams of scientists to work on this.


I was brought in as an equal toxicologists to work on some aspects of this and but yeah, there's quite a few health problems associated with this and are these subsistence Hunters are they free of all the other problems that many Inuit folks have in terms of like cigarettes and alcohol and a lot of people that have been in Do some of the vices of the Western World now in it's the same kind of problems also with these communities in Alaska. There's High tobacco use and a lot of problems with alcohol and how do they parse whether or not it's yeah. It's a contributing factor. You think it's a contributing factor and it's very hard to parse it out. And actually this is the justification the government often uses to say. Well it's not the contaminants from the military side that's causing the problem.


They'll say look the cancer rates are no higher in this Village. That's next to the military side the They are in this Village that's away from the military site. But you know, it's it's a you can't actually solve the problem with epidemiology. We're talking about tiny communities might be the villages. I work in typically are no more than 800 people. Oh, wow. And so how can you do a proper study of a rare Health effect when you have a small population, so I'm sure it's contributing to the health problems. And unfortunately people use the fact that there are these other issues that cause health problems like smoking in order to justify not doing anything about the Pollution. And so when you go to these Villages is it uniform that most of them are using cigarettes and alcohol?


So it's not uniform. So in Alaska actually most of the villages are legally dry. And and so it's illegal to have alcohol. It's illegal to bring in alcohol really but many people do or they Homebrew is this because the village has realized the problem with this in the community. Yeah, exactly. And so they have passed their own laws there. There they have their Sovereign governments. They passed their own laws to make their Villages dry. But there are still problems of course with alcohol and drugs even in try communities. So they pass these laws they make them dry. But people sneak the stuff in any way. Yeah. Yeah. In fact when we fly into these Villages and and small airplanes. There's typically a State Trooper searching through looking to see if anyone's bringing alcohol and cigarettes as well.


The I know cigarettes are about so is there Where you can study that has this issue with the pollutants but doesn't have the issue with alcoholism. And is there a village that's figured it out and is avoided the alcohol. So that's a great question. I don't know. I have not come across any communities that don't have multiple multiple problems. It's difficult and it's the same in other parts of the world where I've done work like in Australia with Aboriginal communities. There's there's a whole bunch of things going on that are harmful to health, but the part that I'm focused on is a contribution of contaminants, right? I just was wondering if there was a place where you could examine only could the contaminants of somehow and all these people have figured out how to be free of the it's a great question.


Right? It would be a it would be a great way to study but I don't know now you were telling me before that. You also work with some Native American tribes as well. Is this the same issue? I so different kinds of contaminants. I'm doing work down on the arizona-mexico border. That's mostly on pesticide use and We're working with migrant Farm Workers there. And so if you think about the the pesticides that were common when we were kids and a little bit earlier these organochlorine pesticides like DDT, they were pretty safe to handle and the problem was that they were destroying Wildlife causing species go extinct. It's why the bald eagle almost went extinct by the peregrine falcon almost went extinct as from DDT and and so countries including the United States phase those chemicals.


They were replaced by the organophosphate chemicals pesticides and these were developed by Nazi scientist during World War Two. They're very similar to the Nazi nerve gas poisons like Tab and sarin and those chemicals are incredibly toxic, but they break down faster in the environment. So we ended up trade doing a trade-off where the organochlorines would end up as residues on food and consumers would would end up with To unacceptable levels, like if you go back into the 1960s the average American had 12 parts per million DDT and their body fat and that's the toxic level of DDT and that was the average.


So how really terrible consequences for health. So in order to prevent that we switch to organophosphate, but then that caused another problem because then we're asking the Farm Workers instead of using this relatively safe chemical to use do you something that's quite dangerous a lot of people get killed and during application. And and the Farm Workers are some of the most vulnerable people in our society. They're typically migrants from Mexico or other parts of Latin America. They're coming up. They're working incredibly hard. They don't have the right protective equipment and then they're spraying these chemicals that are incredibly poisonous. I also work on that. I'm on health effects of pesticides in the Border region both with migrant farmworker communities and with some of the tribes are now are these are they absorbing this stuff through the respiratory system.


Is it in their skin? Kin, like what is the getting them sick? So it depends on the pesticide some pesticides like DDT you actually get from food and if you go back and look at World War two photos where the Army was spraying refugees and Soldiers with with DDT powder. That's actually pretty safe. You're not going to get DDT Poison by having it on your skin and they were doing this for what reason to kill the body louse because lice transmit typhus and so to prevent epidemic typhus. In the war and after the war we use massive amounts of DDT just spray the people down spray the people down. In fact, the very first time a typhus epidemic was stopped in its tracks was in Naples in December 1943 to February 1944 military just conquered Naples neapolitans had been living and caverns by the tens of thousands under under the city during the bombardment.


And so of course if you're crowded and dirty and you're living in a cavern with thousands of other people, there's going to be body lice and that cause an outbreak of typhus. Has so the US military set up these delousing stations where we literally sprayed the DDT powder and every single person in Naples and stop typhus in its tracks very first time before that typhus have decided the outcome of more Wars than any other Factor it is it is the companion of War. It's also if you go back to the Irish Potato Famine people don't really die of hunger when when they're starving to death they died of disease so their immune system is compromised and the Irish died over a million. Dyrus died during the famine from typhus and from relapsing fever both of which are vector by the body louse.


So that's why we're using DDT during the war typhus is actually something that they've discovered recently in Los Angeles in the homeless Community. Wow. Yeah. It was a big shock. It was a real stunner people are terrified because you know, there's some of the areas in skid row that are literally thousands and thousands of people in these areas are homeless. I mean is the craziest thing you've ever seen it's just The tents and garbage and it's horrific and apparently some of the people have tested positive for typhus. It's a terrible one in some of the wars were typhus broke out like in the Crimean War the mortality rate could get to 70 percent of the people are infected.


So it makes covid look like nothing. Whoo. So the DDT that they're spraying these people with so they shielded their food somehow or another right? They just spraying them physically with it. Yeah. They actually weren't worried about shielding food back there. And but if you were sprayed down with DDT, even if you had some food there that one exposure wouldn't be that big of a deal. So the toxic levels of DDT coming from long-term exposure actually. Yeah, and so for wildlife to because of persistent environment for four decades, then that led to the poison into the lot of Wildlife and when you say Eagles or the Eagles getting it from the prey animals that are eating it. Yeah. So top predators are the ones that get the highest concentrations because it's fat soluble and so So it ends up getting passed from the prey to the predator and you have an animal Like an Eagle.


That's the top predator or peregrine falcon or polar bears. So a pull a single polar bear will eat hundreds of seals. And each of those seals has eaten thousands of fish and those fish have eaten thousands of small fish and so Plankton. So by the time you work your way up through that food web you're at a million times the background Constitution. I had my blood tested once and I tested high for arsenic and You know, I was like, oh my God, somebody trying to kill me and the doctor was asking me questions about my diet and I eat a lot of sardines and I was eating like several cans of sardines a day. He's like, oh, well, that's it. I go really he goes. Yeah cut those out and come back in a couple months.


I cut it out and there was no arsenic. Wow, so I was getting arson he feels like it's not a level that's going to kill you. It's just it's a little alarming to see that in your blood and it was from the heavy metal poisoning in the ocean. So these sardines apparently live at the very polluted. Area of the ocean. Okay. Yeah. I'm surprised that you get arsenic from fish. Typically, it's Mercury that people get it was arson - yeah. Yeah and arsenic was actually one of the it's a metalloid. It's one of the the metalloids it was used in fungicide still is actually in many places. So you can also get it from agricultural use and it's also in background levels high and background levels in some places like Bangladesh Parts of Alaska parts of Arizona Navajo Nation, for example, so this place is and In the world where the natural levels are unacceptably high and then that's where you get in your drinking water.


So people usually exposed to arsenic through water. So these migrant workers that are there the DDT is safe for them to use and handle but these other chemicals that using now in place of DDT are not and they're killing them and we were getting to whether or not they're being exposed to it through respiratory. That's right, right. So so some pesticides like they're gonna States you can you can take it directly through the skin. And so if they're out there in a and it's being aerial spray door, they're spraying it themselves. They could get it through the skin. They can get it through breathing it in. They're not protecting these people they don't they're not wearing gear or anything like that. No, bring the crops. So they do now, but if you go back say 20 years often times they weren't you may remember the protest movement led by Cesar Chavez and in Southern California in the for the migrant Farm Workers and the great boy.


I caught in the 1980s and what that was about was the spraying of these incredibly toxic chemicals without protective gear without proper training and people are getting exposed to really high levels. But even today if you're a farm worker with protective gear and you're in a place like I work in Yuma Arizona where there's agriculture all year round and those people are getting exposed to Aerial applications and handheld applications of pesticides all year round. So even if you have Here you take off your here you go home to your family. You're right next to the the spraying. You're still going to be breathing it in. It'll be on the clothing. It'll be in the food and the water and so there's is there an alternative that's more expensive that's healthier or is there just no way around this?


Yeah. So there's there are a number of Alternatives. So the one that most people talk about is integrated Pest Management and with that kind of alternative you use the least amount and the he's toxic pesticide and only were as necessary. So you're trying to completely minimize pesticide use and use things like spiders and birds and other insects that will bring in spider. Yeah, there will eat the pest insects. Mmm. So if you think about spraying down a field with the nasty pesticide-free kill all the arthropods all the insects and spiders and so on you're not just killing the pests like the grasshopper that's eating the food. You're also killing the insects that eat the grasshopper your You're killing the WASP that parasitizes the grasshopper to releasing that biological control and so integrated Pest Management combines biological control of using animals to control the pest animals with minimal focused use of pesticides.


What do you got there Jamie? What is this for being only on Twitter as of a couple hours ago? This is ten thousand ducks being released on a field in China for pests. Cleaning look at all those crocodiles. Look at him go. That's a lot of ducks, man. Wow, just swarm. It's almost and they're almost like a they know where they're going to like. They're they're all following each other. Like look how crazy that is that that was that's has. Oh, I know this is not your field of study or maybe you know something about it, but it's a fascinating to me how birds move in unison even docks on the ground. They move the way these big massive. Clouds of birds moving the sky look how they move.


Yeah, and it's like fish same thing. And so what what's apparently happening with schooling or this kind of behavior is where do you not want to be if you're in a school of fish? Where's the worst place to be outside on the outside? Right? That's where the Sharks going to get. You everyone's trying to get to the middle at all times. And so that causes the whole thing to be this boiling Mass where all the animals are trying to get to the center and it makes it look coordinated. But really it's just everyone's trying to get away from the edge. Is that the same thing with birds when they're flying around those beautiful clouds. Well, if it's a massive flock of birds like you see with starlings where you have thousands of them, but it's different with things like geese that are migrating or cranes that are migrating where they're going for that aerodynamic position in the group.


So the V that you right? Yeah, and those they're responding to something magnetic, right? They're using a variety of variety of things so that they do sense. There's magnetic field. That's part of But they also use landmarks some animals use polarization of the sun. Like if you if you look at honeybees how to honey bees communicate navigate about where their food is. It's remarkable is that it was discovered by a guy named Von Frisch. You won the Nobel Prize for this along with Niko tinbergen and Konrad Lorenz. They're the only people that ever win the Nobel Prize in something to do with animal behavior and what Von Frisch found is that honey bees when they go out they their workers are for aging they're trying to find a good nectar source.


So they find some good flowers that come back to the hive and they then communicate where that food is with something called the waggle dance, but it's remarkable because this is kind of an abstract language. They they transpose they do the dance on the vertical honeycomb. And they and they transpose the angle from where you have to fly relative to the Sun to the vertical honeycomb. So they they Mission they act like the opposite the sun is completely vertically above the honeycomb and let's say they had to fly 10 degrees to the right of the sun to get to the flower then they dance 10 degrees to the right of the vertical of the honeycomb and they can dance for hours.


But of course the sun is moving but they've moved their dance to coordinate with where the sun would be. They know where the sun would be internally and they're in their brain and they transpose their dance for that, but they don't just communicate. They don't just communicate the angle the fly. They also communicate how How far to fly and it's really about how much energy you need to fly because if there's a head wind it takes more energy and if there's a tail when it takes less energy. So the intensity of the waggle dance tells the other bees how much energy you need to fly there and then when the workers leave The Hive they know the angle to go and they know the how much energy to expend to get there. But bees can also navigate by polarized light. So if the Sun is completely covered up with clouds they still know where the sun is by the polarization of light they still do the waggle dance.


On that and they can also navigate by landmarks and the landmarks actually will take precedent. So you can screw them up. You can have a landmark out there and then they do the waggle dance and then you move the landmark when they come out they'll follow the landmark and go to the wrong place. Wow, so they fucked with the bees to find out whether or not whether or not they could do that. Wow. That is so amazing what it's so fascinating to me how insects have this sort of collective intelligence, my friend. Lex frieden was on the other day and we were talking about ants and about how amazing it is that ants collectively have some sort of intelligence and it allows them to make these.


I'm sure you've seen these gigantic leafcutter ant Villages. Yeah. I've studied them a little bit when I was in school. We did a course in tropical ecology and Costa Rica and you can have a single leaf cutter ant colony with 7 million individuals and they're acting as one, you know, and they can defoliate an entire rainforest tree in a couple of First it but we don't know why we don't know how we have no idea how they're doing it, right? We don't know how they're thinking together collectively. We don't and in fact these cutter answer Farmers. So you have one cast of amp that cuts the leaf pieces. There's another cast of Aunt the custom in tiny little pieces and then there's other answer than processes pieces and Seed them with a fungus and then the fungus grows in this nest with 7 million ants and it grows these little fruiting bodies and that's all they eat the fruiting bodies.


He's from the Fungus that's their diet. So they're doing all that work of bringing leaves and flowers to 10 this Garden of fungus and the fungus can only live with the Ant and the Ant can only be with a fungus. They're farmers are farmers. I've seen the leafcutter ants hot when they when they take it and they fill it with concrete and they show that there's areas that they have that are specifically designed to ferment the leaves like they have event. Yeah, they've built a vent. Like, how are they figuring this out? They even have refuse pits. You can find an exit where they've taken the processed food and fungus and they they refuse it they have a landfill they make so yeah like how and and we just kind of are like we don't know we shrug.


Our shoulders science does not have the ability currently to reach into their little brains and figure out what's going on with might not be brains. It might be firm owns. It might be a variety of different things. Yes. We know some things we know how they communicate with pheromones how they laid down since also the ants the bees and the Wasps they all belong to a group called a hymenoptera and they're really interesting group because the females are diploid like humans. They have to Chrome two copies of every chromosome. The males are haploid. The males only have one copy of a chromosome. So the way that you make a male is a female produces an unfertilized egg and the the workers are all females. So you look at a in a honeybee colony and it calling all the workers of female the only make a meal when there's when it's time to reproduce and so Almost all the workers.


They're all sterile. They don't have their own babies. Right? It's only the queen that has babies when they want to make a queen. They they provide special nutrition to make a queen. And so then the question is why would these workers work their whole lives when they're not having their own babies, right? They're not making their own offspring and part of the answer is they're actually more related to their siblings. Then they would be to their own offspring well, and that's because if if they have their own offspring the related by 50% Right. There are only going to send down half of their chromosomes, but they're they're they're the queen who then has siblings of that worker is sending down half of her genes which are in common with each of the workers, but the male fertilizes those to make another worker.


He only has one set of genes. So the workers are actually related to each other by 3/4 whether only related to their own offspring by 1/2 and therefore because all of the genes are in common through the They're half the genes are in common through the mother. We're lucky there little man. Yeah, no kidding horses. Yeah, and they can't be because exoskeleton can't handle that kind of body size. So that's why I answer if we had a different kind. That's right Starship Troopers. Yeah. Remember I I mean, I think they're some of the most complex and amazing life forms on this planet and it's just so weird that we know so little about particularly ants like how they're communicating and how they're figuring out how to do the uniformly like leafcutter ants that are nowhere near Here, it's not like one Colony figured it out the dad told the sun the sun told the daughter.


I know they're far away from each other and they have the same methods. Yeah, yeah and a leaf cutter ant colony. It'll stretch a huge distance through the rainforest. They make these paths. You can easily find a colony because they clear all the vegetation from their path and the path would be several inches wide and it's working its way to whatever tree they're working on and back see these columns and millions of these of these Ants Marching along with Flowers or leaves and Yeah, that poor tree is naked. Well, there's another weird one that happens when some of them get infected with cordyceps mushrooms is different ants but I think it's in the Amazon where they realize that this ant is infected with these mushrooms.


So they take it far out of town so that it when it explodes and blows spores up in the air, they're not there. That's awesome. They figured out like they know Mike got the zombie and so this If you seen those mushrooms when they grow inside the ants body no, oh it's fascinating. They literally spring forth out of the ants body like a leaf like a tree like look at that. That is that's a dead aunt that has this court accepts mushroom. It's this there's many types of course steps mushrooms, but some cordyceps mushrooms, they grow on caterpillars and they're actually beneficial for humans for physical endurance.


They optimize oxygen absorption. My company on it. Actually we sell a product called shroom Tech that is a cordyceps mushroom based product as B12 and other adaptogens in it, but it's like it's a great workout supplement and it's based on the cordyceps mushroom, but it's not the same cordyceps mushroom, but go back to that again Jamie that looks a lot worse than aliens. Yeah, it's crazy and they though the way we get it they Farm it off of caterpillars, which is crazy. And the way they found is like high altitude hurting. Asians were noticing that their cattle were eating these mushrooms and they were more active and so then they like well, let's try and started eating them. But these these weirdos they they grow inside these ants bodies and then they explode and they spray the spores and they infect more ants but it kills the ant and then look at that one in the upper middle, Jamie look at that.


So let's just all these little arms of this cordyceps mushroom growing out of this ants body. D and it's an awesome question. How do they know that? Yeah. Yeah. How do they know how do they know that? This is going to happen like up Bob's get the zombie fungus. We gotta get him out of town and they'll take his body. They dragged the other ants body way away and then they leave it there and then it'll blow if I remember correctly Sigourney Weaver. Didn't know that those things were going to pop out of people when she got to the spaceship right then and these ants no yes, it's this a video of it. I can't play this online, right? We can take a look at our plan on Netflix as a little piece on it.


It's real CC. They get infected and then these things grow they do a time-lapse video of it our planet fungus. It's a clip from Netflix. So these spores grow in this time-lapse and you get a chance to see how this parasitic fungus infects and it's a murderous fungus mean you killed the aunt and then affects his little body and grows out and I guess it's just hoping there's other ants nearby so it can get them like look how crazy that is. And typically there would be other ants nearby. But yeah, they're all social. Look how Wild that is how it's growing out of the ants corpse and see how it's just they're starting to spray out into the air and these spores will In fact the other ants it's really nuts.


But so cool to the variety of the biological variety of Life on this planet. It's there's not enough time in your life to really even consider it all because there's so many different varieties of it and it's also complex and and so puzzling if you think that all this somehow or another through natural selection and random mutation became that and this weird relationship with the fungus and the Some might be an amazing thing is we know very little about small and microscopic life. And so for example, there's something like 10,000 species of microbial fungi and things that you that are described in scientifically name, but you can find 5000.


Ohms species in a in a cc of soil and so so the unknown unknown just you know, their people will sequence them to figure out we don't know what this is yet you Look at insects and here insects. You would think we would know all the insects when scientists go down to the rainforest. They'll set up a net under a rainforest tree fumigate it to kill the insects collect all the insects of Fallout and a lot of times forty Thirty forty percent of the insects are new to science. So, you know, we know most of the mammals we know most of the birds is we're down to maybe a new mammal Discovery every year or two new bird every year or two, but you get to and there's not that many species of them this about 47 our species of mammals.


There's five hundred thousand species of beetles. Whoa, so there's more beetles than all vertebrates combined by a long shot. That's crazy. It's such a weird animal to Beatles again. If it was huge we would be in real trouble. Yeah. Yeah, we'd be running the Amazon is such a well any of the rainforest or so fascinating in that they do have this insanely dense population of life. I have a friend who went to Guyana and he stayed in the rainforest for a couple of weeks and filming this top my friend Steve.


Rinella this television show meet either on Netflix. And one of the things that he said the craziest part that was you know, really surprising was how loud the jungle is at night. Mmm. He's like you'd think like at night time you go to sleep. It's going to be quiet like the forest. He goes it screaming. It's just bugs and birds and monkeys and all these nocturnal creatures just screw. It's just deafening. That's all around is what is all this noise? Yes has starts at night with the insects. There's it. It can be incredibly loud. Like if you're there when the cicadas are are out and and oftentimes they're emerging on these prime number years.


So there some years will be low. Some years would be very high. It can be definitely like you can have to shout to hear each other when the cicadas are out and then you get two hour and a half before sunrise and you start to get the howler monkeys going off and they have their morning chorus and then half an hour before Sunrise the birds are starting their Dawn Chorus and then everything quiets. In about an hour hour and a half hour after sunrise and it's pretty quiet until till evening again so and depends which reinforce your in so if you're in Africa same thing goes on different species. So if you're in the Amazon, you're going to hear the howler monkeys in the morning. If you're in Africa tropical ass girl your old here the colobus monkeys in the morning.


Yeah. Was real bummer is that there's people that want to chop that shit down just to grow crops or you know, make it for cattle graze or he has particularly tragic because that's where most of the world's biodiversity is in these rainforests. They're the most valuable habitat on Earth in terms of supporting life. So it is it is awful and also was interesting is how many pharmaceutical drugs that can benefit people are derived from plants that they find in the rainforest and they believe So many more to be discovered if we get there before they chop everything down. Yeah, and it's not just before we chop everything down. But before we lose the indigenous knowledge of what plants are good for what you know, the shamans who know from thousands of years of practicing what was good for what and a lot of that knowledge is already gone.


But if you look at most people don't realize how much of our medicine comes from plants and if you look at Western medicine, which I think of all the medical traditions in the world probably has the least With drugs coming from Plants. It's still about half of our drugs are derived from plant products. And you go to traditional Chinese medicine. It's almost all of it you go to traditional Indian medicine is almost all of it. So yeah, there's a there's an incredible knowledge base and incredible diversity of species that we have to protect for our future. We have no idea what drugs might be incredibly valuable and future from the rainforest. It's so interesting to if you talk to people about where drugs come from like where did pharmaceutical drugs come from? They think it's a laboratory.


People do right if you study well they come from plants like get out of here hippie. Yeah, maybe it maybe a lab now, but originally it was synthesized from it was extracted from a branch and then synthesize some of them you can't synthesize it can only come from plants. Some of them can be synthesized and then and then the lab but still I had to come from a plan to begin with now when they're extracting this stuff and they're turning these into pharmaceutical drugs. What is what is the impact that that has on the area? Where is there a danger like when they find something that they can use and extract as a drug. What how do they how do they parse that out? Like, how do they how do they find this that when they have a spot where this particular plant grows do they just take it extract it and then use it to make pharmaceutical drugs in a compounding pharmacy or through some scientific method or what happens to the The other plants that are in those areas and is there a risk that as they're extracting the plants they used to make these Pharmaceuticals that they're screwing up the whole ecosystem of this area and there might be other plants that can do different things that they're now dooming to death because they're pulling out they're focusing on this one drug.


That's really good for, you know arthritis or whatever. Yeah, there's a lot a lot there. So I'm getting as there were monkeying with these right and and so the most efficient way to find drugs in the rainforest would be to find what the locals use what plants do they use for four different things and and there's probably a good chance that that that works and then once that's done, unfortunately the history has been that pharmaceutical companies and take those plants back to the lab and then that's the end of the story for the locals and really that resources coming from them. They should get some economic benefit from those plants being derived. There are some small companies that Trying to do this now.


They're trying to feed money back to the communities where they come from. But if you want people to protect the rainforest they have to have an economic incentive to do so and one of those incentives can be around Pharmaceuticals. I used to work in a rainforest in Western Kenya. And there there were there were many problems associated with people girdling trees because a lot of the medicines come from the bark Grayling. He said they would cut the bark completely around the tree Within Reach and all the bark they could each they would cut out and then you have this this 500 year old tree that dies because it doesn't have the bark anymore which it needs for moving nutrients around. So yeah, they can it can of course damage the forest but I think one of the most important things is just not just taking that resource in a responsible way for the environment but also in a responsible way for the people who live there who made these discoveries over thousands of years.


Yeah. So how do you incentivize pharmaceutical companies? To bring in these folks that live in this area and incorporate them like and actually include them in the prophets. Like how do you because if they don't have to do it, especially when you're going to a place like the Amazon which is notorious for them taking advantage of the indigenous people and you know having these horrific abusive relationships. I'm sure you're aware of the guy who got murdered in the Amazon just the other day got shot by this tribe and he was actually one of the people that's trying to protect these uncontacted tribes and just leave them alone. And yeah, unfortunately, they it's hard for them to recognize whether or not this is a guy that's there for the oil companies or the cattle companies because they've had these horrific relationships with these companies that are trying to exploit them and the resources and so they shot this guy killed them with an arrow.


Yeah and it and usually it's the other way around you play It's the gold miners who are killing the environmentalist and so I don't know the answer to your question because I don't know. Motivate businesses to do the right thing. I think we have a long history on this planet of businesses doing the wrong thing when they get the power and and not thinking responsibly about how to do what they're doing sustainably and also I would worry that I mean, I don't know if this is a good warrior or if I'm being ridiculous, but that if they did hit some sort of a windfall if they found some area of the Amazon where they have this plant that you can make pharmaceutical drugs out of it. It's Credibly valuable and so there's an enormous amount of profit for this Village.


You you don't want a situation like you have in these Native American communities where a tribe allows a casino to come in and then it sort of bastard Rises what the reservation used to be or the tribe used to be. Now, you have all these people running around drive a Mercedes and making all this money off of people gambling, but the original way of life is gone now, obviously with Native Americans. There's a lot more complicated. Them's that go way back for the you know, the genocide the fact that they were taken over by the settlers and all the trees that were broken and all the various injustices that were done them then on top of that you've got this whole weird Casino culture.


It would be like, I don't want to live in a subsistence jungle tribe in the middle of the Amazon, but that's how they live and they love it and they Thrive that way and that's the the only life they've ever known if we all of a sudden gave them money and you go back and now they're wearing Under Armour t-shirts and you know, they have iPads and their party in and playing music and you know, they have internet connections and their way of life is gone like the argument is is that good or is that bad is that progress is I don't know. I don't want to live in a hut but I think it's awesome that there's people that live off the land, you know the way They've lived for thousands and thousands of years when you see those photos of those uncontacted tribes.


There's one incredible photo of these folks that are pointing their bows and arrows at it was either a drone or a helicopters taking photos and I'm like, wow what a weird convergence of the past and the present and how does this play out like is would it be good if they were educated about modern electronics and medicine and the internet and all these different or would it be better if you leave? Them alone. Like it's a it's a conundrum. Is that the photo? Yeah, look at that goddamn. That's cool. I mean this dude has a big fist full of arrows as a couple of them. And these that's the one that's the one that I've seen before that one with these people are all they all have body paint on and I mean, there's something really wild about that, but would it be better if they got medicine would it be better if they got I mean, I don't know I don't I think that communities have to decide for themselves.


Right what they want and they don't know they don't know the consequences of bringing in a row the Western world. Right away of life. Like it. It's cool that you can see that still. Yeah. It is cool. I think that part of the answer though is can the technology be integrated in a way that fits with the culture and can they make it part of their culture isn't it? A slippery slope? Maybe maybe not like wouldn't if you were if you were living on a reservation when she still love to have your Porsche, but that's a reservation. Yeah. See the reservation is in America and they're well aware of what's going on and what happened to them and theirs There's so it's so much more complicated. Whereas this is they're isolated.


I mean, there's many of these tribes that really don't they're not aware. Yeah like that one in the island off India where the that America is on my own. Yeah about that. Fella. Yeah. Yeah. That's a that's a really weird one because they they actually welcomed people before that. There's a I think the guy's name is Commander. Maurice of a dowel Portman he was this English Explorer / pervert who would go to these islands and dress these guys up and take pictures with them and do all kinds of weird shit and weird sexual stuff too, like measuring their penises and they're they're both areas.


And so he he traveled around there. He is right there. Look at that guy. Looks like a little freak. He he he got a lot of people sick and kidnap some folks and there's a lot and they want to getting rid of them. And now I think they probably have some stories that they passed down about what happens when white people show up and boats. So when that poor fuck got out trying to bring Bibles, you know, they probably had this story about white people showing up in boats that ruin your life. Yeah. It's probably a part of their history and their lore and they're you know, they're they're they're legends that they pass down. Yeah, so so you can certainly Understand why they wouldn't want anyone coming in anymore.


Well, yeah, and there's only they think there's only like 39 of these folks left. The direct descendants of people left Africa 60,000 years ago. Yeah, it's crazy. It's there's not many of them and they don't even know if they use fire. Like there's no evidence that they're using fire that they have some metal that they got from a boat that sank and they had they did attack another boat was an instance of a boat being grounded and They got rescued just in time when the North Sentinel people were making their way to the boat. They extracted them and got them out of there and they think that from that boat they made some knives and some various things.


There's a guy named is Twitter name is respectable lawyer, and he has a great chunk like a Twitter thread on a Maurice of a doll Portman in the North Sentinel Island, and he liked you. He's like he studied it for years. So he's got like a really In-depth depiction, there. It is right there respectable respectable law. Sorry respectable lawyer is the name but respectable law is his handle. It's an awesome little thread though if you get a chance to and there is Maurice without partment big thread about this creep and some facts from his debt. This gentleman's decade-long obsession with the island and you think about just during our lifetimes when we were kids the picture though gonna go to that back.


Wait, look at the picture in the upper left hand corner. That's the kind of shitty did with these guys. He had them posed in this these weird outfits and weird homoerotic stuff. The guy was a freak. Yeah. So I think back to when we were kids there were lots of people that were still not contacted or still living in a traditional life. Now, there's barely any right? It's a huge story. If you find a small group in the Amazon that have not been contacted yet. Yeah, so things have changed incredibly fast and I don't think we know what that means for people yet. It's just all happened so fast. I it's a bummer because and it's all so confusing. Using because I don't I could see it both ways. I could see it like wouldn't it be better if they got education and wouldn't it be better if they got medicine and wouldn't it be better if you give them iPads filled up with porn like not really but wouldn't it be better if they Advanced but you didn't have 3/4 of the kids died as infants and right.


Yeah, all the stuff that goes along with these sort of nomadic tribal people. Yeah. It's a but it's also cool to see Like when you see those guys with the painted bodies pointing the bows and arrows like those folks are probably living exactly the same way people 10,000 years ago. And it seems like they don't have any metal. It seems like they're using the natural materials to make their bows and arrows and they're covering themselves with pigments. They make from Plants. It was really fascinating. Yeah, but I don't wanna live like that. Yeah, right. So what is the answer? Yeah. I don't know your kind of reminded me of what our discussion earlier about the people. Business people in the Arctic and when European explorers first got to Greenland and Baffin Island and places like that.


The locals basically didn't have any heart disease because their Marine diet was so protective of the heart all of these Mega Three fatty acids, all of the wonderful things you get from fish and so here they had one of the healthiest diets in the world and then and then now it's now it's still has those healthy elements, but it also has unhealthy elements because of the way that we have polluted the world so it's kind of the same. Sort of change where where things are dramatically different than they than they were not very long ago. It's crazy that we gave them a double whammy to right they get the pesticides and then they get all our vices as well and the Native Americans the same thing in terms of the vices, you know, it's it's such a it's a bummer.


It's really when you think about alcoholism amongst Native American populations and and also, you know Inuits Eskimos are so many different folks that have problems with all these things that we brought to them. You know, it's and it ruins our understanding of their health because like as you're saying like the low instances of heart disease in the like it's that was confusing to people because like wait a minute these folks on the eat any vegetables. Yeah. This is kind of incredible very Very few diseases no cancer, no heart disease. Yeah, so they do eat greens traditionally by other get it it just in the summer. So there's a short summer season that collect plants and the collect also aquatic vegetation in the intertidal zone and then they save that throughout the year.


But essentially you're right the reading very little in the way of vegetation compared to what we normally eat right a salad or whatever almost their entire diet is coming from the ocean. Yeah. It is a pretty amazing. You were also in your book and in that podcast you guys brought up for its harbor and the he's a guy that I've talked about in this podcast multiple times because I listened to a Radio Lab podcast where they it was. I think the podcast was called Good and Evil, but it was basically highlighting people that have done amazing things but also awful things and he's like literally one of the best examples because he Being he was going to be awarded the Nobel Prize for this method of extracting nitrogen from the atmosphere at the same time.


He was wanted for crimes against humanity. That's right, which is pretty pretty Bonkers. In fact, he had the only Nobel Prize in the science has ever contested there were French scientist who refused to accept a Nobel Prize that year because he was getting a Nobel Prize. So explain why for people so the backstory of this is that the the two greatest physical Chemists in the world before World War One were Fritz Haber and Walter nernst both in Germany. And Germany had the best chemistry in the world the best physics in the world the best biology in the world. It was the highlight of science around the world and habour and nursed were racing each other to see who could be the first one to extract usable amounts of nitrogen from the air to make fertilizer to make Ammonia, and they were there playing around with incredibly High pressures incredibly high temperatures and hover got there first.


And so he figured out how to do this and that really averted world hunger because before nitrogen could be extracted from the air the air is 80% nitrogen. So before we could pull that out of the air fertilizers came mostly from caliche deposits in Northern Chile, they had to be the old bird droppings and things that had to be there were and over millions of years had to be shipped to wherever you want to do your farming and also even people they would use remnants from battlefields human corpses for fertilizing. So we were in a situation where the world was constantly hungry people were starving every year because of a lack of food and harbor solve that problem.


So that initiated the Green Revolution the the mining of nitrogen from the air the making of artificial fertilizers. And so that was done a few years before World War one and when World War one broke out the Kaiser first assignments to develop chemical weapons for the German military and he failed he was unable to make effective chemical weapons. We don't know whether he was unable because he was one of the two greatest chemist in the world. It seems unlikely to me that he couldn't figure it out or whether he just didn't want to do it. And so he purposely failed. So when he failed Harbor had just succeeded in his assignment for the German military of making an effective antifreeze for the German military vehicles that were operating in the winter fighting against Russia.


And so they had this problem that had to be solved in Harbor salted it making antifreeze. So the Kaiser assigned Hopper the task of developing chemical weapons for the German military and he started working with chlorine gas and chlorine gas because it's heavy. So if your release it'll stay near the ground, it's completely lethal and started testing it and in fact, his assistant was my great-grandfather James Franck and and Franck and other scientists would put on gas masks and they would expose themselves to these these chemical weapons and figure out how effective the gas masks were how effective the they self tested and it was incredibly dangerous as you can imagine, so, So through these tests Harbor figured out that you need a slight slight breeze to deliver this weapon.


If you could see grass bending in the wind it was too strong of a wind and so then they they went to Belgium to the Battlefront in Belgium and wait until the wind was just right and then they release the chlorine gas from cylinders thousands of cylinders. Then this this gas just started marching its way slowly towards the British lines and it was mostly British colonial troops algerians and And British soldiers and at first the British soldiers started firing their weapons into the gas. So the soldiers on the German lines had never heard so much gunfire in the war as happened when that gas was coming to them.


They try to stop it by shooting machine guns and everything. They had. Of course, I wouldn't stop it and then some of the troops fled some of the troops charged into the gas and those died so there were probably ten thousand people who died. Soldiers who died immediately and that tens of thousands of casualties and that was the beginning of that was the first use of a weapon of mass destruction and it was the beginning of the modern use of chemical weapons in War and it's a horrific way to die to write horrible way to die. And so and however, actually he after that victory at I'm not sure if I'm pronouncing it correctly Europe. Why are PES in Belgium where that battle took place after the victory there?


He and his colleagues celebrated at their home and his wife went outside with his service revolver and shot herself in the head killed herself in front of their son Herman. So she was completely opposed to the use of development and use of chemical weapons that was part of it. But also she was a prominent chemist her cell she gave it up to marry Harbor and he was also having a dalliance with his future wife. So there are lots of things going on, but she killed herself. He left that very night. To deploy gas weapons on the Eastern Front against the Russians and you left us 13 year old son alone with his dead mother is dead mom. Yeah, and so then he fought using the same techniques in the Eastern front and then they develop mustard gas in his lab which was much more lethal than the chlorine-based, you know, the original chlorine gas and after that a whole series of other chemical weapons.


So by the by the end of the war both sides about a quarter of the artillery had chemical weapons in it. Which is incredible right you thinking about this battlefield? It's just complete chaos and a quarter of the weapons flying over those trenches was chemical. You know speaking of pollutants and War and chemicals there was this area that we were talking about once in the podcast. That's the size of Paris and France that is uninhabitable because of Munitions I think is from World War II and there's so much unexploded Munitions and so many bombs were dropped there and so much chemicals get released into the environment and in the atmosphere and Into the soil and everything that it's uninhabitable.


It's an enormous area. Yeah. So the first time that I went out to work in the aleutians, you know, the chain of islands ago off of Alaska. I flew out there with a couple of other biologists everyone else on the plane were Munitions people. They were going out there to look for unexploded Ordnance because the Japanese invaded the Aleutian Islands during World War II is the only American soil taken over by a foreign power and that's and that's how the war in the aleutians happen. The reason why there's a road from the lower 48 to Alaska as US Army built the out can the Alaska Canadian highway to get the military up there to fight the Japanese. And so when I flew out there the first time the military was giving the island back to the alley tribe from whom they had taken it and they had to find those unexploded Ordnance all these bombs and things that were left there.


So we were told look when you're doing your biology out there. Please let us know if you The ordinance we had GPS is with us because we were doing the science. We found a lot of unexploded Ordnance and just marked everything with GPS gave it to the military so they could go out and what's a lot, you know, you come across bomb to come across even things like the Ramos takes those those hikes they would set in the ground in the grass. We can't see them so that when forces come in, they get impaled on these things and and so the grass is tall there. And and obviously we were worried about this. So you're going through parting the grass. They have these angled spikes.


Yeah to try to catch people walking through or the soldiers charging up in the beach there. We get impaled on spikes how many of them there are a lot of the spikes but you'd also find find bombs not just from World War Two but then afterwards in the Cold War this particular Island a tech became the a very important Navy site and during World War II adak Island actually was the largest community in all of Alaska. There are 5,000 GI station there. Can you imagine in the middle of the Aleutian chain and saying that was the staging ground for the American Armada that then attack the Japanese Fleet and fought together Japanese out of the aleutians.


So given that there were sixty five thousand soldiers are in the during the war. And after the war is a very important Cold War military base. There's just incredible stuff there. We found these bunkers that that you know, you could go in there what military wasn't there anymore? You go in these bunkers are flooded with water and they're still beer sitting on the counter there still plates of food from decades ago that are just sitting there. Whoa. Oh Jimmy, pull up some photos of these bunkers. Yeah. Wow. That's wild So when you say you found a lot of unexploded or what does that hinder our militaries Barracks? So when the tribe went back to this island, you have a hundred hundred twenty people, maybe go back and they get to choose from housing that used to how 65,000 people.


Well it was the farthest west McDonald's in the world. I just saw you go by there it is it's not there anymore. But there was a McDonald's there. That was the farthest west in the world because his island is just a couple of degrees from the From the hemisphere creepy is McDonald's. They set up a McDonald's out there Freddy. Come on guys. Yeah, really? Wow. Yeah, the the images of the no go Zone in France are insane. Like we have size of those ordinance. Yeah. When you say you found a lot of unexploded Ordnance, like how much well maybe a bomb or bomb let every hour or so as you're looking around.


Yeah. Oh my god, there was a lot they had trained out there for decades. It wasn't just from the war. It was from all the Cold War military training. So how many of those are at risk of actually accidentally going off any of them but it's been cleaned up so the military cleaned everything up and and as far as we know, there's no more unexploded ordinance as far as we know. Yeah air quotes. Yeah as opposed to You go to places where minds are, you know, that's a million times more dangerous. I have no idea but these things are on the surface. You can see them can they use lidar to find mines in you know, because that's one of the things that they're using in these a lot of these jungle environments to find lost civilizations. Isn't that cool? Amazing? Yeah highly quite fascinated by that like the Mayan ruins that they find that way which are completely underground and under the rain forest.


Now, it's all down over and you know you go down to To those places like can beliefs and you see this pristine rainforest. It's actually not a natural rainforest. If you look at what species of trees, are there a lot of them are species that the Mayans cultivated. Yeah, right. They wanted those trees there. So it's not the natural Forest anymore. It's a human Force there was made for humans to have the food and the medicine that they wanted you that blew me away when I read that that a lot of the reinforces actually because people grew those plants specifically and it created A rainforest. Yeah, and then that reinforce engulf their civilization. Yeah. Well when you find also, they have these irrigation channels that they find with the lidar when they realize all look at this.


There's grids like these these these people who live there and they not even sure who those people were what was the movie that came out a few years ago the about the guy who found the gold City It came it was a few years ago about a traveler from England from Britain from Great Britain that had come down to the Amazon and he found this lost tribe and there was all this gold there and this this and I think they're the original guy had lost city of sounds like a Harrison Ford movie got a long time it does it sounds like it but it's not it's a fairly recent.


The but is it okay that were movie. Did you see what I did see that? I thought I did see that was that movie the poop hole dig dig dig. I did see the Maxima Kane was movie called gold that was sort of like that. No, not quite it was a another gentleman who is not well known the lost city of something fucker. It was based on a book and the book was based on the real. Real or you know Loosely based on the real-life explorer who went down there and eventually was killed. They think by cannibals or was cannibalized every time I'm typing in Lost City of Gold is just doors.


Oh God, I can't believe I don't remember I you know what? I have it on my new look on my iTunes on my Apple watch my movie. How did I cannot remain in the lost city of gold? Is that it? Mmm. Based on a someone out there knows what it is or there's also the City of Gold so I know the least about popular culture of anyone you'll ever meet that's amazing. I'm happy for you. Nope, that's not it either. What is that? What it's from Recently? That's the thing. I feel like I know you're talking about but it's I bet you do. What is that?


It was it was pretty decent hate when this happens. We're not going to find it either. And yeah, here we go got it is z that's it. I was gonna say World War Z. Yeah Mike, but I know that's not right because the lost city of Z. That's it. That's the dude. So this is actually kind of interesting movie about this guy who goes down there and the idea is there was a city that existed and then by the time he had returned, I think the theory is that European explorers had given these people diseases and smallpox and I can get wiped out like enormous swaths of the population almost instantly within you know, 10 years.


There was nothing left and then the jungle just overtook whatever civilization they had and then when you know, we're going back and looking at it through lidar. That's what we're seeing. We're seeing hundreds of years later that there's very little evidence and that's actually exactly what happened when when Europeans came over with slaves. They brought over typhus. They brought over yellow fever they run over. Area there was one year in the fifteen hundreds when two million indigenous Mexicans died from typhus. And these were all brought over from from by Europeans and Waimea Bay trade 1 year 2 million 2 million people in Mexico and Indigenous people died from typhus. And you know, these were people who were you would say their epidemiologically naive to the disease.


So they people colonize the Americas from Asia, whatever 20 30,000 40,000 years ago, and they hadn't experienced these diseases in that entire history, so they had A resistance to them so when yellow fever came over when influenza came over when all of that it just wiped out these populations. And so that's why Europeans were able to conquer the Americas so quickly because the people were dead mostly before the battles could even take place most of the population being wiped out and and this happens, you know, even more recently like st. Lawrence Island where I do a lot of work in the Bering Sea in the 1918 influenza epidemic the Spanish flu epidemic that wiped out most of the eye.


Island I think there were they were something around 18 Villages now, there's two so it's it's that was only a hundred years ago. Yeah, people are stunned when they find out that 90% of the Native Americans that were killed in this country were killed by disease. Yeah. That's a that's an amazing heart horrific number ninety percent. Imagine a disease that came. I mean, we're all very upset about covid rightly. So but covid is a very small disease in comparison to what happened to the Native Americans. It's nothing compared to these other diseases you look at the mortality rate of of influenza. They're coming through and Killeen 80 90 percent of the people.


That's it. Makes covid look like nothing. So, how is malaria connected to Colonials? So that's a really great question. Malaria is actually killed more people than any other disease in human history. And the origin of that is when when about 10,000 years ago when people started agriculture agriculture, then people were clustered around water sources because you need water to grow crops, see how the relatively dense population of people around. Sources the mosquito the vectors malaria is called anopheles which in Greek means good for nothing. It was actually named before it was discovered to be the vector of malaria. And so malaria has been an epidemic proportion disease for Humanity for about 10,000 years since the origin of Agriculture then as as people moved around the malaria moved with them in around 1828.


I think it was two French chemists extracted. Quinn Ian and cinchona 9 from the cinchona plant which came from Peru and the indigenous people of Peru had already been using this plant to treat what they called relapsing fever, which is malaria a fever that comes and goes and comes and goes and the first European to use it was the Viva Peru the Spanish viceroy's wife was treated with this to treat her to cure her of malaria that was in the 1500 s so Jesuits brought cinchona bark from Peru to Europe, but it took a couple of hundred years before these French scientists were able to extract two of the four active ingredients in the bark, which is Quinn.


I'm in Sancho nine and they then were able to use that to diagnose malaria and also to treat malaria and once it was a Treatment available for malaria, then not much happened in terms of how it led to separation of people until the it was discovered that anopheles vectors malaria. So Ronald Ross made that Discovery in in DM 1890s. Once that Discovery was made it was quickly realized that there's a disease Reservoir. So all of these diseases ever Reservoir typically its animals that carry them that can infect people but also people who can infect other people and some people don't get sick even with covid some people maybe half people don't get sick and they serve as a reservoir for the disease.


So once scientists realized that there's a reservoir for the disease actually discovered in Africa that children act as a reservoir for malaria, so they get a More benign form of malaria typically and in in sub-Saharan Africa, the people also have genetic resistance to malaria because the many people are heterozygous they for sickle cell Gene. So they have one one normal copy of the Sickle Cell Gene and one one mutation for the gene which gives them resistance to malaria. So when when the colonists realized that children were the were the reservoir for Native children where the reservoir for Malaria, and there's a treatment for it.


They segregated the European population the colonists from the Africans and they even destroyed indigenous hearts that were too close to the European colonists homes. And that was the origin of modern segregation modern in that lady concerns early nineteen hundreds of segregation and in Africa and Colonial Africa, it started with trying to separate the source of malaria that the African children from the European colonists. Wow, but it also Plays out in many other places. So even before it was known that what the mosquitoes vectored malaria you can find cultural differences you go to malarious Regions where there's mountains and you'll find that the people who live in the mountains have a different language than the people live in the valleys and they have a different culture and they separate from each other and the only time the people in the mountains would interact with the people in The Valleys was in the non malaria season.


They wouldn't come down when there was a malaria. So there there you have a disease. That's that's Basically culturally separating these these people from the mountains and from the valley also in America. It also entrenched slavery. So when when the Europeans first colonized America, they first enslaved indigenous population and the and indentured servants who were Europeans, but both the Europeans and the indigenous population were getting wiped out by these diseases. They didn't have resistance to them to the yellow fever the malaria all of these other ones and so when they started bringing over Africa Plays black African slaves these were people who had natural resistance to malaria because they have the Sickle Cell Gene and they also had acquired immunity to Yellow Fever because they typically would get it as a kid when it's less the effect is less pronounced and then they'd have resistance to it for the rest of their life.


So the resistance of the African slaves to these diseases and trench slavery because they were the valuable worker. So that really made this continent spiral down into slavery it also led to To the cultural separation between the North and the South because in the South there was much more malaria than in the North in the United States. And so that meant that the working population there the slaves they were they were more valuable because they have the resistance to malaria and yellow fever and so drove a lot of the the cultural divide in this country. That's insane. I had no idea I had no idea. Malaria was so prevalent in this country.


I have a couple questions first going way back. To extracting quinine and moves the other. Cinchona. How did they use that to diagnose? Right? So before that nobody could tell the difference between malaria and all the other febrile illnesses lots of illnesses cause fever how do you know what illness it is? If they're all causing the fever. You just can't tell you could tell with yellow fever because people get yellow fever. They have a black vomit they make and so that's why it's off. The disease is often called black vomit because of the vomit but with malaria you can't tell And so you could tell once they had Quinn I'm in cinchona because they could treat someone with a fever and if they recovered it was malaria, if they didn't recover it was a different febrile illness causing figure that out how they figure out that these two extractions from plants.


Do they know that they have an origin of like what sure people figured out that that would treat malaria. So the origin actually is going back to what we discussed before it was the indigenous people in the Peruvian Andes who were using this plant to treat febrile. How did they figure it out? You know, just like all the other Shaman kind of medicinal treatments it's over centuries. I don't know crate. Yeah, it's amazing when you think about it. Like you taught I've spent time with with Shaman and rainforest both in Africa and Latin America people the real deal, you know where they have thousands of different plants that use for things and they know every single plant they know every single treatment. I actually hired one when I was working in Kenya 1992 to teach me the plants of the rainforest because I had a had a translation book.


I was working in a in a part of western Kenya the tribe is called the lujah tribe and they had I had a translation book from their language English. And so I had to teach me all the plants in their language and then I could figure out what it was and that's how I was able to work on the plants that I was working on there. That it's amazing that there's a lot of people that in the western world. They're Highly Educated would look at those people in terms of you know, like what what their knowledge base is and kind of like dismiss it like their Shaman. Okay, like what does that mean? Like, what are they doing? They're talking to tree arrogant, isn't it? Yeah, it is what it is.


When you think about the fact that they figured out somehow or another thousands of years ago to use these things to treat malaria. Yeah. Now the other question I had was I did not know that malaria. Was that prevalent in the United States? And what did they do to eliminate it? Right? So we couldn't eliminate malaria until it was discovered that the anopheles mosquito is the vector for malaria. Once that happened. The very first elimination is actually took place in Egypt and in Cuba, so that was 1902 basically and so the United States conquered Cuba and the Spanish-American war and as we took over Cuba many of our soldiers were getting yellow fever. So the United States military set up the yellow E4 Commission of for scientist who went to to Cuba's led by Walter Reed and they very quickly figured out that 80's Egypt.


I another species of mosquito was the vector for yellow fever. Once they figured that out. There was a guy named gorgas who was hired to solve this problem. And what he did is they went through Havana and they broke open every pot that held water because these both 80s Egypt I and which factors yellow fever and chikungunya. And what's the other one? There's another nasty tropical diseases vectored by ATC aegypti. Anyway, they that mosquito and the anopheles mosquito they breed in stagnant water. So they started breaking open all of the containers of stagnant water anything that was too big they screened.


They treated with kerosene in the space of a couple of months. They completely got rid of yellow fever from Havana, which had had yellow fever every single year and killed. Thousands of people every year and they got rid of almost all the malaria about 80% of the malaria by getting rid of the breeding habitat. Once they accomplish that gorgeous then moved over to the Panama Canal Zone. So the French had tried to build the Panama Canal, but they had so much mortality from malaria yellow fever that they they gave up and so the United States bought the rights from the French the French wanted to get out of there and get what they could out of it. We bought the rights from them gorgeous went through got Of all the standing water to get rid of malaria yellow fever and that made it so that we could finish the construction of the canal and then of course we back these Panamanian Rebels to steal can't Panama from Colombia because as part of Colombia create the new country of Panama so that we could have exclusive control of the Canal Zone.


Once that was accomplished. This is all between 1902 1910. Then we started eradicating these standing water sources in the United States and by doing that and eating them with what are called clicking sighs which are pesticides to kill larval mosquitoes. So through drainage and through using a pesticides. We got rid of malaria from this country. Well if that was possible in America the why do you eat do we hear all this talk about genetically modified mosquitoes and using that to treat malaria in Africa. Is it just the span of at the scale of Africa's just too massive? No, the problem is that the mosquitoes very quickly evolved resistance to the chemicals that we use so things TT was very effective for a few years, but then then the mosquitoes evolved resistance and is no longer effective against malaria.


And yeah, and so in the United States, we were able through our infrastructure through our ability to to drain the water and to and to cover water and treat water rear of the get rid of it, but not only the resistance but also like you're saying the infrastructure is hard and you have Much more of it. There you go to Africa as this is the origin of malaria. There's far more malaria there this four different varieties some some are more deadly than others. So it's a more difficult problem is still the number one killer of of people as far as an infectious disease goes and sickle cell anemia, which is prevalent in America with African-Americans comes from the resistance to malaria, right?


Yeah. So what happened is there's there's a Tiffany haddish taught me that by the okay, so there's a gene that that that relates to the shape of the hemoglobin and its ability to carry oxygen and a mutation in that Gene and the Sickle Cell Gene. It causes the if you have two copies of that mutation one from Mom one from Dad. It causes it you get the sickle shape and those people are anemic and typically don't live but if you are the heterozygote, if you have one Sickle Cell mutation in one normal, you have a normal ability to carry oxygen but the parasites Site, it's a it's a is a now I'm having one of these brain freeze is that the parasite that causes malaria is an amoeba like parasite it's not able to penetrate the hemoglobin if you have that Gene, so these people are protected from malaria.


They have the advantage of that and so it was a mutation that was a random mutation that had this huge selective Advantage for for the people who lived in these malarious regions. Then those are the people that were brought over as slaves to The new world and and so of course, they have their genetics they bring with them and once there's no longer malaria here. It's not an advantage to have that Gene because there's no molarity get sick with and if you're a heterozygote and you marry someone else's a heterozygote 1/4 of your children will have sickle cell. Anemia. They'll have the both of the mutated both of the mutations that leads to this. Pretty terrible anemia condition how much of an issue is that today? Is that still a giant issue?


So it's more common among African-Americans like you're saying because it's a it's a mutation that arose in Africa, but it's relatively rare to have the disease because because you have to have two people who each are carriers to to have children together before you'll get someone with it is relatively rare now in comparison to the past is everything it's relatively rare in this. Country because there's a lot of intermarriage and and it's you know, relatively rare mutation is just more common among African Americans than among other groups and you could take your your whatever disease you would like. You'll find different ethnic groups have that disease like I'm Jewish and we have a lot of taste Sachs disease and among Jews among French Canadians.


What is that disease Tay-Sachs? Yeah. It's a terrible disease that causes the kid to die when they're three or four years old and it's caused by single. Ghal recessive mutation. And so if you have two carriers who have kids then a quarter of their kids will have that disease and it's completely lethal. So it's common among relatively common among the Amish among Jews of European descent and among French Canadians. And those are the main groups. But you know, you could take you could take whatever genetic disease you want. You'll find different ethnic groups have different frequencies of having that and we have that a little in my family. We have that Gene. We don't have anyone with the disease, but if you have that Gene After then get your spouse has to get tested to see if they have it as well.


So, you know if you might have kids with it, that's a really tough call if you both have it but you both love each other, right? So then do you have kids or do you adopt kids? Right? Yeah. So is there a cure for sickle cell anemia? Do they know how to stop that? So I don't know how they treat people with it. I know there's treatments for anemia, but I know the people who have the disease they get quite sick, so I'm not I don't know more about It I grew up with a guy who had a need to hide from it is guy that I used to do martial arts with it was a real bummer because it was just like really Dynamic just like super powerful athletic guy and then he would get really sick and then he would come back and he'd be okay again, then it get really sick.


Again. It was a reoccurring thing with him when you're talking about eradicating malaria in the United States how they did. That. Is it is it a hundred percent eradicate or are there? Only cases of malaria in America. No, you can still get cases because there's still a lot of malaria and Latin America and so you can get these mosquitoes coming over that are carriers of it border crossers. Yeah border crossers and they can start set up new breeding habitat. Then you have to treat it again and often has happened. You know, I don't know but I've had to go on I do a lot of work in the tropics. I've had to take the medicine that you take to prevent getting malaria bunch of times and and even that medicine in the the parasite evolves resistance to it so quickly.


He so, you know, we take one thing and go back six seven years later. You have to take a different medicine because her already and some of the medicines make you go insane to so there's I mean they can make yeah people go and say no my friend Justin has gotten malaria several times. He said it three times actually and one time he got it because he wasn't even in Africa. He malaria must have been dormant in his system. Somehow. He got really sick and then from being really sick got malaria again. Yeah, so to can recur it doesn't have to be a new infection. He he runs fight for the Forgotten. It's a charity building Wells for the pygmies. And so he takes regular trips to the Congo and oftentimes there for months at a time and he's he's caught malaria multiple times there and he was taking this one medication in very high doses.


And this is one of the medications that the military was having real problems with soldiers getting very sick from this medication and he was taking many times higher doses than the soldiers were getting sick and He wound up getting really fucked up from that to it was probably mefloquine. That was um, yeah, so I took that when I went to Africa in the early 90s and it a lot of people get vertigo from it some people get psychotic from it for me. I just had strange dreams. That was what I noticed. It caused really bizarre dreams, my friend Dave Foley who was on news radio with me who is the nicest guy in the world? Like he couldn't be a sweeter guy was on that because he his family was going to Africa and he had to meet them there and so he was taking this anti-malarial drug and You're not supposed to drink when you're on that stuff either.


No one told me that yeah, did you get fucked up from it too, but we used to make these black and tans there in the rainforest. You bring out the you could get Guinness Stout in Kenya and you can also get tusker this Kenyan light beers. He could make black and tans out of that. And so did you do that while you're on meth Laguna? Yeah, and I'll tell you a funny story is when when we would do about one Supply run a month out of the forest to get stuff and it's a full day to get to the village and get What you want to get back? So we wanted to get beer so we went into this Village and and I went into the local shop inside like to buy a case of Guinness and a case of tusker. And the guy said where are your bottles? So what are you talking about?


You said where your bottles you have to have bottles to turn into get to have to turn in your old bottles to get the new beer. Like I don't have any bottles is 0 I can't say beer and how well this guy's an idiot. So I went to the next shop and I said, I want to buy a case of tusker and in case of Guinness and he said where are your bottles went through the whole thing again? I'm going to third shop same thing again. It's like well, how does this start? Where do you get your first bottle? And so finally I realized there's got to be a solution to this and they're all saying there's nothing we can do. So then I said could I buy a case of bottles off of you empty bottles of tusker and a case of empty bottles of Guinness. There's like sure I bought these bottles and got on this that I can I'd like to buy a case of tusker and a case against us and yeah, so that's how I was able to get the beer.


It's amazing that they It in sort that out for you. Yeah, didn't you just come to buy bottles hours now, it is impossible but not care if you have to inherit the bottles from your grandfather. So what so what was it like when you take in the mouth full: and also drinking, well, maybe that's why the weird dreams. I don't know because I didn't know you weren't supposed to drink here. You just told me this for the first time. Well, I might be wrong maybe Dave is on another medication, but we were at this party. It's one of these weird press parties that they would have these press junkets where the actors from the show would mingle with The press and people would be drinking alcohol and they would come by and just ask you questions and we have tape recorders in your face. It's really terrible idea, especially but back then this is pre-internet. You kind of get away with doing not pre-internet but pre-social media and pretty that area.


It really hadn't been exploited to its full extent yet. And so some guy came over and asked David question. He took his tape recorder and shoved it in his drink and told him to fuck off like just unheard of Dave Foley behavior and was like yelling at the guy and Had to stand between him and the guy I had a real I'm like, okay, what is how I don't I don't understand who you so that's not a fuckin was doing during he was like aggressive like psychotic and I had to literally stop him. I don't know if he's gonna do I don't think it would do anything but I didn't know it was it was at the point where I was like, okay. Hey, sorry like I'm breaking up these two and then the next day he had no recollection of it.


He's like, I don't remember what happened goes. I guess you're not supposed to drink Rihanna's malaria medication. Ian, yeah, or he just doesn't react well to add some people have weird behavior on it and then they have to stop taking it the dreams are supposed to be really insane. Right? Yeah. So that's what happened to me. I would just have these Vivid bizarre dreams going on. You know, I can never remember my dreams, but I remember them for seconds when I wake up and then they're gone, but you know when you have a dream and it feels so real and then you wake up and you're not sure where you are, right? It was that kind of thing where every night it was just completely bizarre dreams. And that stuff is supposed to be toxic like it lingers in your system, right? Yeah.


So I was there for three months the first time and in the second time two and a half months and I was getting a little uncomfortable taking it that long people take it for much longer who are but on the other hand you get you're going to get malaria if you're there and you don't take something that's the problem. And so I do the other things where mosquito repellent wear long sleeves all of that, but there's it's just impossible to not get bitten by a mosquito. Though and so so that's why you take the prophylactic you guys use those James. We were just talking about that thermos LD use those thermal cells. I don't know what that is. It's like it's really cool. It's great. If you're in an area that has like for camping if you're an area that has a lot of mosquitoes.


I don't know how bad it is for you though. It's one of the things I wanted to ask you we're actually talking about it just before because we were talking about doing podcasts outdoors and Jamie's like we're probably going to have a net like to try to keep the mosquitoes out and I'm like, what about a thermos L, but And I said well, maybe ask Frank how bad this shit is how I've never even heard of it thermos cells. It's a small device and it is a lifesaver if you're in a especially I've used them in Alberta, which Alberta the mosquitoes no somehow or another they only have three months to live and they fucking go ham like Alaska. Yeah, exactly like Alaska and it's a device and you have these little like sheets like Square sheets and you slide the sheets.


Here it goes. It's a repellent. I'll Surin do you know what that is. Now Alice there Ava threatened Ava threatened. It's a synthetic copy of a natural repellent found in I was probably a Christina's probably I remember yeah. Yeah, it's comes from it. So so this one of the very first insecticide was derived from the chrysanthemum planets pyrethroids, and and so actually it relates back to the World War II era we were talking about before because There are two two important things going on with preventing malaria before the Advent of DDT. There were the chrysanthemum derived pyrethroids insecticide.


So these are naturally occurring from the flower. They're extracted from the flower you can imagine is labor intensive and it's expensive and then there was a cinchona Plantation so you could you could you could grow cinchona tree is extract use the bark to make the coins treat yourself 90% of the world's. Cinchona Supply was on a single Island and the Japanese took it over right after they Pearl Harbor so they then held basically the world's cinchona Supply. It was a little bit in in Vietnam that had it started growing there. They took that over and then the supply of Quinn Ian that was in storage. Most of it was held in Amsterdam and the Nazi sees that so the Americans didn't have this they didn't of the plant anymore.


They didn't have access to the plant or to the extracted drug product for treating malaria. And at the same time there was late. Iran resting Kenya and so the chrysanthemum crop from Kenya was basically non-existent at that time. So the US Army prioritize we need to make a synthetic version of of Quinn. I'm to treat for malaria and we also need synthetic insecticides because the pyrethrins are not aren't pyrethroids are not available anymore. So they ended up going through thousands of chemicals looking for the right thing and they settled on a chemical the Germans had actually developed called apt atabrine and it the soldiers did. Like it because it caused what they call the atabrine tan.


It would make you kind of yellow and some people also went psychotic on just like we're talking about with mefloquine and then there was a rumor going around that would make you impotent and so a room. Yeah, that's all it takes. Yeah, and so the soldiers, you know, they wouldn't take it. So the US Army we were losing nine nine troops out of 10 to malaria within the first couple years of the war in the South Pacific 9 out of 10 out of 10 would be in the hospital with malaria. And so, you know, how can you fight a war? That's why we that the Bataan Death March. We lost that battle because our soldiers were sick with malaria. They were so sick that they were not allowed to leave their patrol Duty unless their temperature was above a hundred and two degrees because everybody was sick.


Wow, and so so we tested these chemicals we came up with atropine. The soldiers wouldn't take it. So then the US military decided. Okay. We need a really good advertising campaign to convince soldiers to take it. The most effective one was actually developed by Australian commander who took a couple of skulls and put them on top of a sign. And so these men didn't take their app to bring and that's what happens but they also started saying malaria will make you impotent and that was what convince people so the US Army recruited. Dr. Seuss Theodor Geisel to make these and you can find all the other real Doctor Seuss. So who wrote the book the guy with the books he made advertisements for And insecticide called the flip gun, which was based on these chrysanthemum products.


And then when DDT came out they incorporate a DDT into that you can find is his ads online these beautiful cartoons with insecticide, but he also made the US Army propaganda posters to get people to take their atropine. Well fun that know you were wow, that's crazy. I had no idea. Dr. Seuss was involved in anything other than writing kids book. Oh, yeah. He was wow. Look at that. that What this country needs is a good mental insecticide Yasser. If you if you Google, dr. Seuss and flick gun there you can start to see some of them there. Wow the flit and that one is before DDT was in corporate.


He has such a unique style of drawing, isn't it? Crazy? Yeah. Well, obviously that's his it must be his I didn't know his his illustrations as well. Oh, yeah, it must be because I mean that is so unique like that style of like creature that he would draw. Yeah. When Beast like this can't stand one Blast. How do you think a bug can last when someone says quick Henry the flit say it spray it and the posters would be Anna I think for anopheles was a mosquito that would suck your blood and give you give you the yeah, if you if you do not look at that.


What how what a weird style of illustration that guy developed like he's it's so recognizable. I mean, yeah, he was he was this on him, but somebody drew it in his style, right? Oh, look at that. Wow, that's crazy. That's really interesting. So these this chrysanthemum derivative that they use for the thermos L. Do you think that's bad for you? So it is toxic in the sense that it kills mosquitoes. And if you have too high of a dose, it can be bad for your health. So it depends on what kind of dosage so using is less toxic than many other things and it depends on whether using the natural version or the synthetic version.


There's a synthetic version called Permethrin, which is more toxic than the Natural version so I'm not sure what they're using in that product but and it depends on the concentration that they're using it's just a fine Mist but Boyd mosquitoes fucking hate it it's like what I was thinking is if we were outside here, it goes foul threatens are toxic to cats good fuck cats could find specifically about it, but it is probably in a low all over volume as what my guess would be based off of just by the way. I actually love cats don't mean that just playing games kids. But if we were outside and we're doing this podcast outside in this table, we had a thermos L cooking right here. We'd be good.


It wouldn't get us will you would literally be it's like a Halo that mosquitoes. Will you would see them come in and go and then they just take off. Yeah, it's amazing. Yeah, so that's going back to the origins of pesticides. Right? Because the very first pesticides were from the Chrysanthemum flower tobacco. Tobacco. Tobacco Patrol vehicle is a good pesticide. Yeah. Yeah. In fact that there's a whole category of Uh sighs now that artificial version of tobacco the called neonicotinoids and they're the most used insecticide in the world now. Well so first it was the things like DDT, the organochlorine insecticides were the most used in the world up until they were banned in most of the world in the 1970s and then they're gone organophosphates became the most used insecticides in the world.


Those were the ones derived from the Nazi nerve gas weapons and those reach their Peak around 1999. They were the most used and now it's the neonicotinoids which are The synthetic version of nicotine. So nicotine is lethal. If you have too much as highly toxic, it's just the right amount of cigarette. Right? But if you have too much as lethal's highly highly lethal to insects and so how do they use it as a lynx as an insecticide they spray and mist of it or spray it. So if you have you heard of colony collapse disorder that yeah, so part of the reason why be and honeybee honeybee and and and and bumble bee colonies are collapsing around the world is because of the Cuttino eyes are highly toxic to bees so they have their own environmental problems, but there are the most used insecticide in the world.


Now, there's an issue with cell phones and bees as well right isn't I don't know scramble them. I don't know. Well, I don't know if it's speculative or what but they believe that there's something about the particular frequency of cell phone signals that might disturb Abby's, you know, like they might be able to hear those signals or perceive those signals that disrupts their Are their natural understanding of the world you could imagine it because yeah animals that like we were talking about before the other using the magnetic field that using polarized light. They're using the using so many different signals. Like you can take a homing pigeon and you can put it on a turntable and cover its head. So you can't see anything and fly it for the United States to Europe Let It Go and it will fly right back to where it came from.


So, can you imagine being more confused than that? You're spinning around? You can't see anything we can just go right on back. Our cell phones killing bees have a false meme spread false. I don't think is it live arms them, but it right but that's what I said. I don't know. I never read it was killing them. But I read that it was disturbing their sense of their ability to communicate and perceive the world they've done. So how does it harm them? What does it they've done things I put a phone specific on a hive and then testing and hmm. Okay. Yes cell phone radiation harms bees a Swiss researcher Place cell phones next two hives and recorded. What happened? That's when the phones were active the bees emitted piping sounds the high-pitched tones that spread the message through the colony that something disturbing is going on piping can be a signal for the colony to swarm.


But that doesn't that didn't happen here and the researcher let the phone's go as long as 20 hours. He did report to the Colony didn't return to Baseline normal state for many hours after the phones are Switched Off and removed but that's a phone being right there. You know, I wonder if it's if that's the actual. All electrical energy coming off of the phone or if that's the signal itself that it's receiving what it is. Yeah, and I wonder too like we guys will put our phone and our front pocket. So what is that doing to if anything? Yeah, so I already have kids. I'm not having more kids. But what about young people young men who are who are doing this? I don't know anything about it, but you have to wonder well, I've read people talking about Sheryl Crow was speculating that she got a brain tumor from doing press on a cell phone all the time and I'm like maybe I mean, how do you how do you how do you find that out?


Like, yeah, it's sort of it's sort of like this whole chemical history were talking about where you make this wonderful new chemical that this Halls malaria to kills the it kills mosquitoes that transmit malaria and yellow fever. So once we do that, why don't we just spread it all over the world without having any idea of what it might what else am I do? Well, that's how I felt too about the idea of genetically manipulated mosquitoes. What kind of chain is Going to put into a Foley. How do we know what if you kill all the mosquitoes of is there's the question was do we need mosquitoes and what function do mosquitoes playing the food channel? Do you want to find out? What's yeah, and if you think about it the the mosquito species that Vector these deadly diseases only a few of them most of the mosquitoes don't carry diseases and then you have all the birds that are reading the mosquitoes, right?


Yeah, who knows what could happen? Yeah, it's just it's weird. We never learn like we it's not just America, it's you. No, Australia brought in cats to deal with all sorts of animals that they had over there. And then now they have a crazy feral cat population rotten. We only showed then click that and then it's got this bufo Toxin and you know their head and then the native marsupials eat it and they die and now they're extinct or on the endangered species list. We never learn and in fact the cane toad it doesn't even eat the cane grub. It was brought over to eat because they're up on the stock and the cane toads on the ground. So, you know, we don't learn even with naturally. So you're talking about like when they were using instead of pesticides using spiders and bring them into are as my you bringing them in like yeah, and in fact, if you're talking about invasive species the species about from one place to another if you're on islands like the Hawaiian Islands invasive species are the number one cause of Extinction if you're not on islands are usually number two or number three after habitat loss other things but on islands are number one.


The highest Extinction rate known Extinction rate of anywhere in the world is in Hawaii. Hawaiian islands, and it's because the Hawaiian Islands they rose out of the sea from nothing. So the species that are there are typically there and nowhere else so they go extinct there there globally extinct and it's all these animals are abroad in the pigs the cats the Mongoose the rats, you know, they're wiping out the native species. Have you ever been to Lanai? I have yeah. Have you seen the access to your there? Yeah, it's bananas. It's the craziest invasive population I've ever seen anywhere. They have 30,000 deer on an island. And people yeah, and they hire snipers to shoot them at night. I mean, it's it's amazing. Yeah, so we were we went to Lanai on one trip.


I've been to Hawaii many times because it's just a straight shot from Alaska. It's very easy to get there from Alaska same time zone when I was a kid it no longer is because Alaska got moved in our East for business reasons, but we used to go there a lot and when our kids were little we were on Lanai and we wanted to go for a bike ride. And so we just asked around as anyone have a bike we can Use we rented this bike for our oldest and it was too big for him. And and so like well, it's okay. We'll still have a nice bike ride. So we're biking along in this flat thing and then there's this hill that's the steepest hill you've ever seen in your life. He's like cool and he goes down this hill and then as his his handlebars are wobbling like this and he just splattered and there's like no skin left and I ran and grabbed him and I was just running for the for there's one Clinic I was running for the clinic and is one of the Nations where your adrenaline's going and you feel like you know, you could do anything by literally got to the clinic got them on the table and collapse because I couldn't have carried him another inch and it ended up being this wonderful thing because it was just it was just Road Rash, right?


They treated it pulled the rocks out of him and everything. But then everyone Inland I knew us and it was the big news on the nigh and everywhere. We went people say, oh, you're the you're the kid who wiped out on his bike and they invite us into their house and ended up having this fantastic trip because of that. At bike accident. Wow. Well, that's a lemons to Lemonade. Yeah situation. That's look it's a beautiful island and the people are really nice. It's a I love it there but it's a strange place when you see the amount and I think they were given as a gift to King Kamehameha by the king of India like in the eighteen hundreds and they just they're everywhere. It's not like you see him at night. That's when it's really nice when you driving and you just see like thousands of eyeballs like staring at you on the side of the road.


And there's no native mammals there. So now there's no Predators. Yeah. Yeah, and they're delicious. Yeah, Telex the best tasting dear in the world. They're incredible but invasive species like we really never have learned our lesson in terms of bringing them to places where they don't fit into the ecosystem whether it's what's going on right now in Florida with I mean, I think they just extracted and killed something like 5,000 pythons. Yeah from the Everglades and they didn't put a dent in it or and the Everglades there. Is a study where they went and they were tracking the populations of deer and raccoons and all these different animals over the past couple decades and they're almost all gone.


Like there's none left. Like they couldn't find any raccoons. They couldn't find any deer. There's almost nothing left and pythons are now eating alligators. There's so many pythons in the Everglades and all from just some assholes just release them like won't this anymore. I'll just throw it in the swamp. That should be fine. I'll be there just so that's why it's an impossible problem. Yeah, because all it takes is one person who says oh, yeah. I think we need Northern Pike in this Lake. I'm going to toss them in there and the next thing you know, that's the only fish. Yeah, and then they cannibalize. Yeah, it's we're so weird that we don't learn from that that it takes so much for us to get it into our heads that that's a bad idea. Yeah.


One more thing I wanted to talk to you about is glyphosate and I've read some things. About the dangers of glyphosate which is Roundup, which is a very common pesticide but one of the things that I read that I don't know if it's true that there's an issue some people believe in animals eating plants that have been sprayed with glyphosate like say if you eat a cow that's been grazing on grass or grains that has been sprayed with Roundup that you could potentially develop gut issues. Because your body is reacting to the toxins that's in the animal flesh from them eating this glyphosate sprayed plant.


Yeah, so I don't know the answer to that question, but it is the most common herbicide used in the United States. It's been banned in Europe. It would have been banned in this country, but for political reasons, it wasn't because of pressure from the from the company that makes it and when do you think it would have been banned whatever it was it? Slated to be banned at the end of the Obama Administration begin to the Trump Administration. And then that was that was pulled off. The regular was the evidence that was indicating that should be banned. So evidence of harming children and in specially animal models in the laboratory of showing toxic effects on animals in the lab.


They're related to things and Children's Health. So that's why the Europeans Bandit so the Europeans Bandit because the children were getting it in what way Well, you can get it from food. So if there's residues left on food, you can get it from plants. You can get it from water. If you're in a place where it's getting into the water supply you can get it from from if you're living in a place where it's being sprayed you'll get it that way and and it's again, it's kind of goes back to this issue. We were just talking about we use so much of it. Like if we go back to the story of DDT DDT would have been a wonderful public health tool to if we had just used it for that. We probably could still use it today against malaria. Area and yellow fever if we had only just restricted its use for these Public Health emergencies and you have a spot treatment here because you have an outbreak of malaria on a spot treatment here because of yellow fever, but we couldn't stop ourselves.


So we put it in wallpaper in for nurseries. So that babies wouldn't have flies on the wall. We put it in paint and we covered everything with this paint. We put it everywhere if you went on an airline in the 1950s and 60s the flight attendant would walk down the aisle spraying DDT. What? What so you wouldn't have to be bothered by any mosquitoes or flies on the flight? It's that's the problem. It's this is going from here's this Precision Tool that we should keep. It's awesome. Right you want to use this to stop an epidemic where we can't we have to use it everywhere and then it's no longer effective because the pests have evolved resistance. It's the same thing with these with these herbicides like there's some uses for it. You could say or are probably good like you have invasive plant species in Hawaii.


We're just talking about why there's a lot of the extinction errors from invasive. You have invasive plants and they can kill it with Roundup and then they can plant the native plant and restore that for us. So this very small scale kind of precision use but that's different than just broadcasting it everywhere. And then we all get exposed to it. So glyphosate or Roundup in America is used for crops, right? It's used to it's a herbicide on pests. All right. Well, so Revolt the way that the way that I would Define the pesticide is any chemical that's designed to kill a pest. In this case, the pest is a weed. Right? So herbicide is a kind of pesticide and insecticide is a kind of pesticide a fungicide is a kind of pesticide rodenticide is a kind of pesticide.


It's just pesticide as a general term for any chemical you're using to kill a particular pest in this case. The pests are the weeds and all weeds. Are are there the competitor plants to our crops, right? We don't want them to grow we want our crops to grow. So we use pesticides a weird word to right? Yeah pest Pest and the side means kills her brother. The past but it's a weird. It's like a scientific term for a slang term. Exactly. So what is a pest across this something? We don't like yeah. That's all it is. It's a living thing though the living thing they don't like we've delegitimized it because of the past so they spray glyphosate to keep these these unwanted plants from growing and the plants that grow.


Why don't they react in a negative way? Yeah. So there's a few reasons for us to some of the crops are actually genetically engineered. So that they can handle the herbicide so they are not damaged by the herbicide the pest is and then they out-compete the the pests to grow that way some species are less damage by others by these herbicides and in is actually really interesting history that deals with Warfare with the stuff too because the herbicides were first developed at the beginning of World War II and the idea was back then we have plant hormones for plants also have hormones. They the plant to grow in the way that they're going to grow is if you could make an artificial version of that plant hormone, you can make a grow too fast so that it dies and this was proposed to be used during World War II as a weapon to kill the the rice of the Japanese so you could wipe out their food supply and so that so that they start and then they're obviously the less effective at fighting if they're starving after World War II it was actually used by the British and the Malay Peninsula and then we used it at a massive scale and the IT Nam war in Vietnam Laos and Cambodia and operation Ranch had where we sprayed 20 million gallons of defoliants over the rainforest.


And what we were trying to do is we were trying to wipe out the food supply of the Vietcong. So starving these people and we're also defoliant in the for so we could see the Vietcong forces from the air and and that led to have you been a Vietnam. No, so if you go to Ho Chi Minh City's Saigon is actually kind of a city within the city where they are these Lid for a kids when we were spraying there, they have all these deformities they have they have missing limbs have deform limbs at tremendous health problems. And these were kids who were in the womb when you know, their mothers were sprayed with this by the US military they developed these horrible deformities.


So, you know this kind of warfare environmental Injustice thing. It extends even to herbicides which were used in war and because of that at the end of the Vietnam War we actually signed signed a declaration forbidding the use of herbicides in Warfare. We forbid them in Warfare, but we don't forbid them for our own consumption. Right and the crops that we eat, right? And so we're not using the same chemical. Well, there are actually two chemicals that were used in agent orange that are still in use today in herbicides. But the process for creating them creates a less toxic compound. Now the problem is that we're using so much of it and so it's sort of like the DDT problem like you could get sprayed with DDT.


Kills the body last on you don't get typhus. You're not harmed by it, even though you're covered with a stuff but you're eating a day after day for years. You're going to be harmed by it. And it's the same with Wildlife like we have a global decline of amphibians going on amphibian species are getting wiped out around the world. And a lot of it has to do with pesticides. So, you know amphibians are aquatic herbivores when their larvae and then their predatory terrestrial animals when they're adults, so they're affected by everything in the water. They're affected by everything on the land. And and their development is screwed up. So you end up with males becoming females you end up with all kinds of thyroid diseases from these various pesticides. So what exactly is Roundup doing to us and these genetically modified plants that except the Roundup that don't have an issue with glyphosate that are able to thrive when they're being sprayed by glyphosate like what kind of problems are we having digesting those things?


Well, A lot of the concern is around the development of the brain for the child and so the child in the womb and then the young child growing up. So a lot of these chemicals are neurotoxic and say affect brain development and actually the same with a lot of the metals. We were talking about earlier the primary toxic problem with things like Arsenic and mercury and their organophosphates. There are their nerve poisons their their neurotoxic ends. So the main concern is with children's development and of course if you mess with a children's brain, it's it's permanent. Right your this like the lead the lead problem where I talked about this actually the very beginning the book and the preface that that Miss Lee Thomas Midgley jr.


Was working on this engineering problem of how do you make it so automobile engines don't knock and and they were knocking it lower the power lowered the efficiency and he figured out if you add a touchhole ethyl lead to gasoline you could make this engine that didn't internal combustion engine. They wouldn't knock. You got lead poisoning in the development of this some of the workers died from lead poisoning when there are developing this this Gasolina called the Ethyl gasoline the attention it read as a marketing Ploy and then for the next 80 years millions of people were using leaded gasoline. The entire Earth's atmosphere was was polluted with leaded gasoline. We have Untold millions of children in the womb and in early development whose brains were permanently altered IQ permanently degraded from this impulse.


Civet e permanently increased you look at the you remember the crime wave in the 1980s and you talked to say the the police chief of New York City. They'll say well it was crack it was and we solved it with this Zero Tolerance policy. I think and a lot of scientists think what actually led to that crime wave was lead poisoning and poisoning by by other neuro toxic metals because shit you look if you look at the at the lead pollution in the United States and then you put on 18 to 20 year delay because those boys have to grow up in the young men and the men are the ones who are doing the crime. You see that there's this perfectly matched curve between LED policing the atmosphere and increasing crime rates.


And then we took lead out of gasoline when we were kids lead was removed from gasoline in the during the Carter administration led started coming down the atmosphere and the you see a 20-year leg crime rates come down. It's not just crime. It's also unwed pregnancy. It's also all the juvenile. I'll delinquency it's murder. Its rape all of these things track lead poisoning in the atmosphere. Holy shit. So the impulsivity and aggressive behavior as Behavior impulsivity, you know not being able to Think Through what you're doing. These are all things that can happen with lead poisoning in the Roman Empire probably fell because of lead poisoning really serious stuff because they were using lead pipes and they were getting let in their water supply and so they probably started making bad decisions because of lead poisoning.


Wow, now Roundup and children and the the neurotoxic effects of this stuff. Now they use it for corn. What else do they spray Roundup? I don't know all the crops that use it for I just is the number one herbicide still you still in the United States not in not in Europe anymore. But how does someone avoid is you have to eat organic food? Like what is the way to avoid it? Yeah. So that's a great question. So for pesticides that are on the surface of the plant you can wash them right and so So you can you can clean your food or if it's something that like a banana that you peel you can do that, but the only problem there is a lot of pesticides are so called systemic pesticides are actually taken up from the plants roots and the plants circulatory systems delivering it throughout the plant.


This was actually a technology that was developed by Gerhard schr?der during World War II. He was a Nazi scientist who invented sarin and tab and and all these nerve agents. He also invented systemic pesticides. And so if it's a systemic A pesticide is incorporated into the plant. Then the only way to not get it is to wait long enough that it breaks down. And so they're supposed to not Harvest that crop until the systemic pesticide is broken down. If it's one the sprayed on the outside of the plant that is surface. You can wash it what I like to do is there's some good online calculators. You can look at most of us can't afford to only buy organic and that would be the best thing to do, but you can't most people can't afford it. So where you can do is you can look at what how much pesticide residues are in different kinds of plant.


Strawberries have a lot. So strawberries are good one. If you're going to invest, you know, if you have a limited budget you want to get one thing organic strawberries would be a good one to get organic and then other things wash well before you eat. So strawberries have a lot systemic or a lot. So they have a lot on the surface and they have high pesticide residues compared to other crops. So defected to wash them. Yeah. I mean you won't get rid of all of it, but you can get rid of most of it by washing them. God damn it this how is this stuff? Still legal. I mean is it just is it that much of a factor in yield and crop yield is that what it is a huge factor in crop yield and so, you know the pesticide industry would argue look we're not starving anymore.


You go back to before we have these modern pesticides and there was mass starvation and there was also much more disease like you go back into the 18000 as you could expect you're going to lose if you have 10 kids, you're probably going to lose three or four of them when they're when they're kids to D2 disease Maybe. And now we live in this world where you know, you can your kids can make it they're not all going to die from disease. They're not going to starve to death. So there's great things that have come from this but at the same time we are overusing these pesticides and we're we're relying too much on them. And then we end up with with these problems agree. There's great things that have come out of vaccines and great things that have come out of all these pesticides and herbicides and all that stuff, but knowing that this is doing damage to children today and the fact that this is illegal in Europe now, Now and should have been illegal the end of the Obama Administration.


If not for political influence. How is that tolerated? Well, it's it's horrible right there. We have corporations who have that kind of clout why is in that they would do that right further profit and why is it that a corporation should have more say in and more influence with politicians than you do or I do that scientist. Yeah, or anyone just a regular person on the street. Why can't everybody have a say and in what goes on and We have a situation where these corporations have way too much influence way too much power and their money is working our politics. Is there a way to grow food for all the people that we need to grow food for without these herbicides.


So with integrated Pest Management, you can grow food for everyone on the planet. How much would it cost and that does use some pesticides it's just uses way less than what we're using now. So it's integrating the pesticides with the biological control with crop rotation part of the problem we have is we rely on these these monocultures still have 10,000 acres of the same thing. Yeah. Well, of course when a pest comes in there, it's going to take off right there's food everywhere, right? And so if you go back to the Incan Empire a single farmer Incan farmer pre-contact would have a cuff few acres of land. They're growing potatoes. They would have 200 varieties of potatoes on their land and then you go to Ireland at the time of the famine one variety of potato.


You know, the whole country is 95 90 90 95 % of the news. Mission of this entire population of 8 million people. Well, of course, you're going to have a disaster and so part of it is we have to go back to a kind of Agriculture. That's much more diverse rotating crops all of these other things and then we could use these chemicals but use them in a very smart targeted way. It's just so disturbing that this is used all over the United States on crops, and we know it's damaging does it I don't know if there's evidence of this, but does it make sense? It's that if you ate a cow that had been eating grain that had been sprayed with glyphosate that you could potentially develop issues from eating that meat.


Yeah, and so it has to do with how long is it from when the sprain occurred until when the cow eats the plan until you eat the cow because you can look at how long is that molecule last before it breaks down. So this was the big problem with the organochlorine compounds as they would persist for decades. And so that's why you go to a In 1964 and she'll have 12 parts per million of DDT in her breast milk yet. If cow's milk. If you go to the grocery store and the cow's milk had over four parts per million DDT. They couldn't sell it. So the average woman was producing milk for the baby with three times the amount of allowable DDT and food and that was from eating from eating animals that have been eating the crops that had this thing on it.


So we have shifted to pesticides that break down in the environment much faster. Which is a good thing because there's much less residues in our food, but we're actually use more pesticides now. So when Rachel Carson published a book in 1962 that led to the emergence of environmental movement it led to the major environmental policies United States, which were passed between 1968 and 1976. And you know, that's remarkable. We think you think back to President Nixon you think a Watergate right? But really what what else was going on. We had the National Environmental Policy Act of 1968 Endangered Species Act. Clean Air Act Clean Water Act Safe Drinking Water Act all of this all the major environmental legislation that they were all passed by a democratically controlled Congress and they were signed by a Republican president.


So the environment was politicized after that. Why don't we still live in a world where everybody cares about the environment and Children's Health? Why should this be a partisan issue? I just find that ridiculous, right? We should all care about this and we should all be working together to try to solve it. But now it's like everything else has become partisan it is Everything is partisan. This is ridiculous. We're in such a strange position now in this country and everything's all these conversations are toxic and there's no middle ground is no room for nuance. But the idea that we're doing this with our food supply is very disturbing is but is there other than these bring in bugs and how would you do that with a mono crop if you're dealing with like if you have thousands of acres of corn say how would you deal with the The issue of plants that you don't want their or weeds or whatever they're trying to kill.


Yeah. So that's part of the problem is growing the monoculture. You have to shift to the more diverse agriculture. So with the only thing need that much corn right because a lot of it is for agriculture lot of the the reason why they're growing is for feed right for Animals. Yeah. Yeah. So but you there's plenty of other crops that we need to so instead of having 10,000 acres of corn here and then 10,000 acres of soybeans here and then 10,000 acres of wheat over here. You make this a more his chest like Board of crops so that you're not creating this situation where the pests can just explode in their population rabbit. If you have a farmer and you know his company or his family's business has been growing corn growing corn for animal feed or Force, you know corn syrup or whatever their use it for if that's your family business.


Now, you have to diversify your family business, you know, just start growing soy and Alfalfa and all these Different things just because of this Roundup issue well, but you go back to that farmers grandfather and he was growing a diverse set of crops, right? But I mean if you but you know, as well as I do that most farmers are like on the verge of bankruptcy already there. It's a really tough business you work really hard and you barely make any money and you know, you get subsidized by the government if you grow certain crops like corn, but if they're if they're already in a tough spot like and then they of Distributors that accept a certain amount of their corn every year and this is what's valuable to them.


How do you get that guy? I mean, how do you say hey buddy, you know, you got to stop using Roundup and instead you're going to grow wheat and you're going to grow asparagus or whatever. It seems like it's a tough sell. It is a tough sell. But every time that there's a challenge like this. There's also creates opportunities for how do you improve your Market? We actually had a farm when I was a kid. We had a 80-acre farm in Alaska and we lost money. Every year it's a very tough thing to do especially in a place like that where there's a three-month growing season. We were the only Jewish Pig farmers in Alaska and we had we had hay and we have potatoes and chickens and geese and ducks and pigs and you know, it was great, but I understand it's a tough life and it's a tough way to make a living and and we need to have policies that help people that help people to to do their farming.


Without polluting the food supply without polluting the world and and in the process make a more productive diverse economy for them. Was there a suggestion when they were talking about possibly outlawing glyphosate. Was there a suggestion for other ways to go about removing weeds and unwanted plants and that maybe this there could be a workaround or was it just a political decision to shut it down. Yeah, so that money. Yeah, so the decision to to ban it was It's on the toxicity and the effects on children, but you're also bringing up another really important issue, which is this concept of regrettable Replacements. So for example, we were talking about DDT and when DDT was phased out because it was showing up in food supply and and women having breast milk with unacceptable levels of DDT in it.


Then that was replaced by the organophosphate chemicals, but then we talked about how they're toxic that led to a lot of poison in a Farm Workers transferring the risk of Farm Workers. Those have mostly been replaced by the new nickel. He knows these artificial versions of nicotine. So we also have this history in our human history of the of replacing something with something else without thinking through the consequences and in the process of it. That's why we call it a regrettable replacement. We keep substituting one thing. We don't know what it does for something else. We don't know what it does. So I don't know the answer really to your question, but I think that we need to be supporting our agricultural industry diversifying it using integrated Pest Management minimizing the use of these pesticides and it's Just for our own health.


It's also for the health of the environment like you like to hunt right you go to you. Have you been a Kodiak Island in Alaska? No, I haven't. So if you go to Kodiak Island, if you go to the southern tip of the island, there's all these deer where their antlers are completely messed up and the males have cryptorchidism. This is where their testes have not descended. So they're getting some kind of a contaminant that makes their development messed up. I don't think you want to eat those probably like you see this deer doesn't have testicles hanging down its antlers are All deformed, you know, you might think that's not the animal that I want to hunt. I want I want to clean animals the same thing you get a cow for your your dinner. You want it to be clean? You don't want it to be full of chemicals.


So I want Jamie see if there's any known connection between glyphosate and animal protein like see if how would you Google this? Is there can I tried sort of yeah, it's found in a lot. Stuff so when they've tested things so they tested at most of it would be. Yeah, but the most stuff they're testing is Great Grains and things that are growing like that. So if you buy grains you are ingesting some glyphosate when DDT came out we started using it on dairy cattle and on me cattle and the idea was to kill the flies that are harassing the cows all the time and DDT actually greatly increase the yield of meat and cows, but then it was discovered as getting into the milk and then kids are drinking it and all of that.


The graphs a thing is very disturbing because we're not talking about the 1960s. We're talking about 20, you know, 2014 or 2016 right? That's what you're saying. It should have been eliminated. Is there any discussion right now to have it removed? I know there's there's people in Brazil farmers in Brazil that are suing the company that makes it yeah so different countries have different regulations I go to some countries where they're still using DDT. So just because it's band here doesn't mean it's it's and everywhere two fractions band other place. Has but not bad in America is a disgrace. Yeah. Yeah, and so part of it has to do obviously the politicization of our regulatory process has a huge part of it because that shouldn't be political either right if something is not safe it should be regulated.


And and so I think I think the drivers of this we need to get out of this thing where where the politics are driving decisions that are public health decisions or environmental decisions. The thing I keep finding which is repeated by there might be because of there's been multiple lawsuits about this which causes lots of websites to pop up, but it's saying it's found in up to ninety percent of all food. We eat including vegetables and flush of meat, so, I don't know. Jesus Christ, well, that was the argument for that. I was reading in an argument for grass-fed cattle that you you're much better off eating animals that are just eating natural grasses because there's been no pesticides and they're just basically free-ranging the way saying that the animals you hunt right because they're much healthier because they're eating without these chemicals.


Yeah. Well, there's an issue now with dear that's a pretty big one. That's kind of spooky right now. It's Only deer and CWD you wear that chronic wasting disease or whatever brain? Yes. It's very similar to mad cow disease. So what is that Jakob? Kreutzfeld? Yeah. So is this is they're getting it from from Wildlife isn't some of it coming from Western States and then it's moving into the deer population that are moving around and and Hunters can get brain poisoning from that. Isn't that right? Well, they haven't know right now. It's not it doesn't jump species that right now. Now it's it's isolated in service. So cattle might be able to get it but dear get it they've found instances of mule deer that get it elk get it it different animals get it but it hasn't jumped to humans, but it has jumped species to mice.


And so there are they're really just it's a very disturbing idea that you can eat something today. Like, you know, you go hunting in the woods and you find a deer you shoot that deer and you think oh I have this clean Organic meat but someday whether it's next week or 20 years from now it might be that you could get a brain disease the similar same disease accountable scat. Yeah, you know this neurological disease. It's coming from this the prions that are there in this this this disease they by the way, they've done these sterilization processes on the tools that they use to determine whether or not they have the disease you could these fuckers you Could take these medical instruments in on a deer that has the CWD with his prions and they can be exposed to thousands degrees thousands of degrees and the prion stay alive for like hours thousands of degrees for hours.


And these prions are like virtually Immortal. Yeah. So this is just like what we're going through now with covid because that began from people eating bats and Bush allegedly not there's more evidence that it comes out of a lab in Wuhan that The somehow or another when they were doing these did you know there's a level 4 lab in Wuhan Brett Weinstein is also biologist was on my podcast was explaining and I'm not I would butcher it if I went into detail about it was explaining all the indicators that point to the fact that this was a virus that was used for research and that they were using it to you know, to learn more about or come up with strategies to defeat coronavirus has and that the same lab that's in Wuhan in 1998 or not.


Use me 2018 just two years ago was cited for safety violations. And there have been cases in the past even with Bubonic plague where research Labs actually inadvertently released the the plague into the local population. Yeah. My guess is though when this is all said and done it's going to be for meeting bushmeat in China that the people will have eaten bad. So they've eaten pangolins. It got infected by bats HIV is the same kind of thing right people eating chimpanzees. They're getting they're getting this infection and then it causes the pandemic World, so we're seeing more and more of these diseases because we're punching into this habitat. We've never been in before people are eating the animals and getting and getting sick from it. Well, obviously, I don't know whether or not it came from a lab or whether it came from people eating bats.


And I think ultimately it's not really the big concern the big concern is dealing with the the virus itself, but Brett seem to be fairly convinced without any couldn't say without any uncertainty, but he's fairly convinced that it came from a lad style. I just as you were saying - I stumbled across this online. It seems to be related but silence. Okay, but this is Steve Bannon. Steve banded lie groups. Push study claiming China manufacture covid. Yeah, but see the thing is even if China did and this guy pushed it you would be suspicious you'd be like. Oh great. Now it's politicized again. They've politicized a fucking pandemic disease. Yeah, and now it becomes this thing about the trade war with China or you know, or coming up with reasons.


Is why people should be suspicious of China? Yeah, it's very unfortunate. Yeah. Now it's really sad in its time. He's progress on so many fronts when when things get polarized like yeah, it's terrible and I think it's in our lifetime. I think it's the worst now that it's been I mean maybe if you went back to Vietnam War era there was similar levels but it's you know, yeah, I don't know I wasn't I mean I was alive then but I wasn't paying attention. I was a little kid, but we were both little kids but But I think that's probably the last time that this country has faced this kind of thing. The crazy thing is if you went back before Trump was President, you went back to like the last years of the Obama Administration when the economy had done the turnaround from 2008 and things are looking pretty good.


Yeah, everything was nice and even during the beginning of the Trump Administration, even though people didn't like him the economy was kicking ass and you know there but there was the beginning of the polarization because there's so many people didn't like him and the people that did like them. They're like, fuck you. It's like, you know, they had like some They had someone on their side now that we could they could thumb their finger up at the Liberals and then it just got worse and worse and worse and then covid threw gasoline on the fire. And now now half the countries on fire. Yeah. I mean, it's just like when you think it couldn't get any worse. Yeah, you have record wildfires. We have the worst air quality on Earth in Portland, Oregon. Yeah, all that being said though when this started and we Stew first started getting case of the United States.


I was really concerned the Society would fall apart and I was partially I think I was concerned about that because I just spent eight or nine years reading these historical accounts of society falling apart during the Bubonic plague during yellow fever and so on where literally the society fell apart and that hasn't happened. I totally it's I mean compared to past pandemics things are pretty good. We have two months till the election right? I mean my word that's I'm worried about that, too. I'm very worried about that the post-election. World could get fucking wild. Yeah, it could get really wild. I'm legitimately concerned about that.


Yeah, my I'm concerned about two things. I'm concerned about the erosion of democracy in this country and I'm concerned about a violent backlash. Yeah, and so it is a worrisome time and I'm also concerned about a new disease. I mean when you see what happened with this pandemic and you realize this is a fairly mild disease in terms of like historic. Just what if something horrific like the Spanish flu or something along those lines that we don't predict coming. Yeah. This is why we need a very vibrant Federal agency that deals with this that prepares for it. Yeah. That's what really pissed everybody off when they found out that the pandemic response team had been sort of redistricting and expanded and What else concerns you is there anything else that should freak people the fuck out because we've kind of covered it all covered it all from toxins disease, too.


Yeah, well, you know, I think that we all want a brighter future for ourselves for this planet for wildlife or nature and it's useful to learn about the history because you can see these mistakes you and I have been talking about mistakes the same mistake made over and over again right of let's throw this thing out. We don't know what it does and see what happens and and you know an example of this is my family has a log cabin in New Hampshire that my grandfather and my father his brother. Adult back in the 1940s. Yeah, it's really cool. It's on 30 acres and it's now an inholding because after they did after my grandfather bought the land and built the cabin it became National Force.


So it's this really beautiful spot and in the 1950s the forest service decided to do an experiment so they came in and they dumped massive amounts of DDT In this River to see what would happen and it's so course it killed all the fish, but then they never even came back to see what happened. So to me that's kind of a metaphor. For for just stupidity. Just wanted to see they just yeah, let's do an experiment. Let's let's try to poison into an ecosystem and let's make it so you can ever fish here again, and so fuck it. So, you know, I would like to see us being careful and thoughtful and you were talking about genetically engineered mosquitoes and whether that's a good thing or a bad thing. Maybe it's a great thing right?


Maybe if we genetically engineer an awfully as we can get rid of malaria and not harm mosquito populations and not harm nature, but we Figure it out before we release these things before we try the unintended consequences are what really concerns me exactly and and they happen all the time. Let's just seems like we have an amazing amount of knowledge comparatively to people that lived thousands of years ago. But when you think about how little we know about just about ants communicating or various bugs and and how they operate in debt. We're going to fuck with mosquitoes. And we don't really we really don't know what the hell's we don't know what happens.


If you take that piece out, like let's take that piece and throw it over there what happens? Well what there's a void now and what fills that void and what are the what are the domino pieces that fall into place? We do we know I don't I can't imagine if we don't know how ants are so smart that we really know what the fuck happens if we kill all the mosquitoes sure and you're saying we know all this we have this incredible knowledge. We have so much knowledge that we're just six months into the Pandemic and there's already eight or nine vaccines close to develop my right that's incredible much faster than ever before but are we any wiser than people were thousands of years ago. There's no evidence that we're any wiser. We know a lot more but has our are we equipped to deal with these things?


I mean we made nuclear weapons and during World War II, my great-grandfather was actually in charge of a chemistry division of the Manhattan Project. So he helped me he helped to make the the exact same fucking history, but And and so, you know, we make this thing and right away we use it. Yeah, we drop it on Japan and and now we live in this world and when we were kids, I don't know if your school had it but my school would have drills. We had a major air force base in Anchorage and we an army base and we would have these air raid drills once a week and and we had bomb shelters and all of that and that's a pretty scary thing to grow up if and why do we have this? Why are we? Just because we have something we have to use it is the same with chemical weapon.


So, you know, the good thing is we have the the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. We have a chemical weapons ban. We have a biological weapons ban. We have the herbicide ban those last three those all happened in the 1970s and they happened under Nixon and Ford. And so if if that could be accomplished in a bipartisan way why we why can't we deal with these problems we're talking about now in a bipartisan way. I don't know if we're wiser. I suspect we are but I suspect. I said to progress is incremental and the progress, you know, I believe I could say without a shadow of a doubt. We are wiser than Homo sapiens that lived half a million years ago. Sure. I think we are brains a lot bigger.


Yeah, we are wiser. So I would assume I think we're probably wiser than people that live in the 1920s. I think we are I think just based on I know we have more information, but I think we've we've absorbed a lot of it. More so than we probably understand and that if you look at the violence statistics rape statistics racism stitute all the different statistics, like if you look at pinker's work, it shows that things are getting better, even though they still suck in a lot of cases and then I just takes we're a big-ass Battleship and every turn takes a long time. I think we're wiser, but I think it's a long process to educate this dumb monkey.


Yeah. We're dumb. Well we are. And at the same time yeah, I would say maybe if you go back a hundred fifty years they were wiser than we are now because I lived in a much less polluted world and then we got less wise and now we're getting wiser again, you look at air pollution in the United States and the amount of lead in the atmosphere now is less than 1 percent of what it was when we were kids. So the air is so much cleaner you go back to when we were kids two-thirds of the of the waterways the United States were unsafe for swimming or fishing now with about a less than 1/3 so the waters way a cleaner and so we've cleaned up our act in this country the pollutions getting much less. I mean we've been talking about some of the darker side right of these chemicals getting in our food, but the bigger picture is actually pretty bright in this country pollution levels have been going down.


There's more Force now in this country than there was when we were younger there there the air is cleaner the water's cleaner and that's because we have this important environmental legislation like the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act and that goes back to this political point because that was done in a bipartisan way. I think we have to get back to that to solve the problems were dealing with now. Listen. Your book is fantastic. This conversation was amazing. I really appreciate your time coming here. And I really enjoyed it very much. I really appreciate you having me. It's awesome my pleasure and people get is there an audiobook of this? I hope there will be not out yet it please tell me you'll read it when you read it. Will I read the book yet the audiobook.


Oh, no, I don't have a good voice. You know what? I want Iris your word. Yeah. I know. I want a British man. Oh, so like an infomercial you listen to audio books? Yes, I love audio. But my favorite narrators are all men from the United Kingdom. So I'll get someone like there's this guy John Lee's amazing. I would love to have him read my book. Well, put it out there in the universe. Maybe John Lee will hear this. Yeah, but it's available right now. If you're a reader chemical age right there go pick it up. Thank you Frank. Really appreciate that sir. I really appreciate it. Goodbye everybody. Thank you friends for tuning into the show. And thank you to the motherfucking cash app download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today.


And when you do download the cash app, make sure you use the referral code Joe Rogan all one word. You will receive ten dollars and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Ren's fight for the Forgotten charity. It's a win-win for you and for an awesome cause please download the cash app, too. Day, we're also brought to you by butcher box butcher box makes it easy for you to get premium high-quality. Humanely raised meat that you can trust they deliver 100% grass-fed grass-finished beef free range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood directly to your door and they're going to hook you up with ground beef for life.


For a limited time new members can get two pounds of free ground beef in every butcher box order by signing up today at butcher box.com Rogan. That's butcher box.com Rogan go there and get ground beef for life. We're also brought to you by Blue Moon and they're fantastic beer one of my all-time favorite beers a beer that I legitimately drank four years before it was ever His podcast and order one today, not just because it is a sponsor but because it is delicious and I'm just a big fan I was so I was really pumped when this became a sponsor.


I was like, oh, I love that beer. So next time you need to taste of the extraordinary open up a blue moon get Blue Moon delivered by visiting get dot Blue Moon beer.com. See your delivery options Blue Moon reach for the moon celebrate responsibly Blue Moon Brewing Company Golden, Colorado ale And we're also brought to you by CB D MD and they're powerful and Superior CBD oil products to make it even easier for you to try CBD p.m. Or any of CBD MDS amazing CBD oil products. They're going to offer listeners of this podcast 25 percent off your next order when you use the promo code Rogan at checkout.


So once again that CBD MD.com use the promo code Rogan for 25% off your purchase. Is of high quality CBD oil products from CBD empty my friends. We did it again. Thanks so much much. Love to you all bye-bye and big kiss.