
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by Buffalo Trace and they're damn good whiskey they were just named the 2020 Distillery of the year and the San Francisco World Spirits competition has some of the best whiskey tasters in America judging hundreds of Whiskey's and Buffalo Trace one the most it was two decades ago when Buffalo Trace one the same Title by whiskey Advocate magazine and since then they have won more Awards than any other distillery in the world very impressive. Perhaps more impressive they have been distilling whiskey since 1773. They are the they're older than America their oldest longest continuously operating distillery in America.


Buffalo Trace has experienced more than their share of adversity floods fires Wars recessions and prohibitions. They've endured them all their Master distiller and charges Harlan Wheatley, and he also makes craft vodka named after him called Wheatley vodka and since 1995 Harlan has distilling at Buffalo Trace and making amazing whiskey if the whiskey in the barrel is not ready to go into the bottle. It doesn't and they know that because they taste them all. I love the stuff. I'm a big fan of whiskey and Buffalo Trace Whiskey is just fantastic smooth stuff. They're even making hand sanitizer during the pandemic the governor of Kentucky designated bourbon as an essential during this time, and I agree.


Buffalo Trace model is stand strong. They won't come. My eyes, especially on the taster whiskey and I respect that distilled age and bottled by Buffalo Trace Distillery 90-proof Franklin County Kentucky. Buffalo Trace American family owned and independent. We're also brought to you by 4 Sigma mattock and they're fantastic mushroom coffee with lion's mane and chaga folks for somatic is a wellness company. That's well known for its. Fucking delicious mushroom coffee, it's coffee. That's actually good for you. It's got lion's mane in it. And it's got chaga lion's mane is my favorite mushroom.


It supports productivity and creativity during my busy day and is great for the brain plus it has chocolate in it, which is the king of mushrooms for immune support and you're probably thinking what are you talking about? Mushroom confit has taste like mushrooms. No, it tastes like regular coffee. Not at all like mushrooms, but it's good for you. It's actually Coffee that's good for you. That's half the caffeine of regular coffee. It doesn't make you jittery but it gives you energy and it's actually good for your brain and good for your immune system and all forcing. Matic products are organic vegan and gluten-free. Every single batch is tested in a third party lab for heavy metals allergens bad bacteria yeast Moulds mycotoxins and pesticides to ensure the Purity and safety so that you know, you are getting the highest quality coffee and mushrooms possible.


So best of all for somatic stands behind their products unconditionally with a 100% money back guarantee love every sip or get your money back and they've hooked you up with a sweet deal. This is just for Jerry listeners receive up to 39 percent off on their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim this offer. You must go to four Sig Matic.com Rogan. This offer is only for Jerry listeners. It's not available. No regular website go to Fo you are SI G. M-- atic.com Rogan and get yourself some delicious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out.


We're also brought to you by Groove life. You probably heard me talk about my groove life silicone wedding ring and how much I love it. Well the same great people who prove life just launched our newest product and it's called The Groove belt and they recently crowdfunded the groove belt and raised over a million dollars in a little over a month because it's fucking Awesome. They sent me a few belts a couple months ago to try out and I love them. These belts are superior to other belts in many ways. First of all, they're made from high-strength webbing that stiff enough to not Bunch up on your back belt loop, but it's tough enough to concealed carry and second the groove belts webbing has the perfect amount of stretch. So it moves with you throughout the day and it also makes it extremely comfortable third.


The groove belt is the first belt that I've ever worn. They don't have to adjust seriously just adjust it once Sighs and you're done and it has an awesome belt buckle, that's one of a kind it's got this cool. Now this is I don't know what this word means neodymium, but it's awesome. It's a magnetic clasp and it's very satisfying it snaps in place. Just an awesome company Groove life is located in Nashville, Tennessee, and it's a true American company employing over a hundred and fifty people and groove life started in Alaska just a few years ago with their Flagship product the groove ring that I wear right now got it. I'm right now and it's now expanded to other accessories including this awesome Groove belt check out the groove belt and groove rings at Groove life.com and use the code Rogan for 10% off your first order.


We're also brought to you by master class with Master Class. You can learn from the world's best Minds anytime anywhere and at your own pace and they have an amazing assortment with over 85 classes from a range of world class. Is that thing that you've always wanted to do is closer than you think you can learn from Timberland. He'll teach you producing and beat-making. You can learn from Neil deGrasse Tyson. He will teach scientific thinking and communication Gordon Ramsay will teach you cooking Tony Hawk with teach a skateboarding. Martin Scorsese will teach you filmmaking RuPaul will teach you how to be fabulous actually teaches self-expression and authenticity.


Hey, dr. Jane Goodall will teach you Ation, and this is just the tip of the iceberg. It is an awesome place for you to go and to learn and again, you do this at your own pace at your own time, whenever you want to do it. I highly recommend you check it out and you can get unlimited access to every master class as a Jerry listener, you will get 15% off an annual membership. Go to master class.com Rogan. That's masterclass.com Rogan for 15% off Master Class. All right. My guest today is a British conservative author and political commentator and a guy whose books.


I really enjoy I particularly enjoyed his latest book The Madness of crowds whether you are conservative or Progressive. There's a lot in there that is very insightful and really well-written, please welcome the Great and Powerful Douglas Murray. The Joe Rogan Experience trained by day Joe Rogan podcast By Night Douglas. How are you? Great to be with you again Joe. How are you? Great to be with you as well, and we were talking about you potentially being able to come to America. Hopefully sometime. Right. I'm hoping to have you do I do be nice to be with you for the end time.


Well, I've escaped to Texas. I think I'll avoid the end times by at least a couple of months. I think we'll know bring us what it might have bought you. I think it's already happening in California. I mean, this is if it keeps burning the way it's burning what's going to be left some friends of ours sent photos from Mammoth, California up in the mountains. It is a hellscape. It's a terrifying Vision. It's just everything is on fire. It's So bizarre. Yeah, and it's um, it's the combination of events isn't yes. The other thing is so terrifying. It's like just seeing a civilization being hit by plagued by fires by pestilence by politicians.


Yeah everything if we were in another time where we didn't have access to information, we would be sure that this is the end if we were we'd be expecting the Sun not to come up tomorrow, but is there We'd be expecting demons to arise out of the fires and ride horses with searing eyes and then we could try to work out which of our friends with a demons and slaying them for no reason, right Riley Salem Witch Trials. Yeah, it's at Los Angeles, which I was telling you that I before we get started that I fled. I I really never thought too much about the government there. I never thought too much about who the mayor is or who the governor?


But my God, does that matter? Yeah. Yeah. I just saw the mayor of Portland is done another cracking one in the last 24 hours. I think he sort of there's some it's some move to have even less policing or something like that. He's he's hilarious because he is the most Progressive mayor in this country and they're like, fuck you not good enough resigning. No cops. No laws. No rules. Yeah, so it seemed like came to his house. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah that didn't persuade him that it was a problem. He's like they they are they mean the right thing there anti-fascists. How could they be wrong?


That's that's one of the other plagues. That's what is this is amazing that that name is still being used by people. I'll is there's some people particularly like hardcore left-wing sites that still call them anti-fascists instead of antifa there. Calling them anti-fascist which is like an obvious move to distort what they've done and what they stand for and what happened in Seattle and what's happening for over a hundred days in Portland. Well, it all matters. Doesn't it the language masses and everyone's being caught on the back foot by it because a huge number of people have clearly been persuaded that they are what they pretended they were, you know, I suppose people are Falling Away bit by bit from believing that the anti-fascists are and actually anti-fascist, but they Really fooled a lot of people is there's a been a clever move on their part calling themselves this if they just called themselves fascists, they might have you know, everyone else might have got their it faster, but they were quite clever on the naming.


Yes, because if you look at what they're doing, there's nothing anti-fascist about what they're doing at. All. In fact, what they're trying to do is get people to comply they're actually using fascist Tactics get getting people to use their language and comply and and they're trying to literally get rid of The current police and the current Authority that and then I'm gonna do my Force the best example of the fact they're not even trying to disguise it is that they're trying to make everyone raise that their arm that was at used to that used to be a giveaway. Yeah, the thing that they did in Washington DC where my I just I'm continually astounded like every day I look at the news for a hope like a glimmer of light like some reason is pop through and it's not coming every day gets more and more bonkers.


Those people outside bunch of white people by the way screaming at this lady who has marched for black lives matter multiple times telling her she must raise her fist in compliance because she's my hero as he she's my glimmer of light. Yeah. She really is I you know quite often instead of good times or comparatively good times people say things like, you know, where the heroic people and they sort of get that heroic people come up because bad things occur and heroism. Which they didn't know was there comes out. I think that woman is a very good example of that. She probably didn't know she had the heroic Instinct and make her not go along with the mob and she just one evening in her own spare time out for dinner proves this incredibly heroic trait, which is no I won't go along with you.


You can't tell me what you do. I won't raise my fist I won't new I won't dance and so yeah, there's a glimmer of light and she was really I mean she was in a beautiful position being that she Has March for black lives matter? She does believe in the cause of stopping police brutality against people of color. She believes in all those things, but she's like that's not what this is. This is a bunch of thugs bullying me into compliance and it's a natural bizarre disgusting natural human instinct to try to get people to bend to your will and that's where all those idiots were doing when they were surrounding her with this arbitrary gesture of raise your fist as if that helps anything also didn't you feel I mean people have too generous to the people would go along with this.


But when I saw the footage of the people in DC restaurants who did go along with that, you know, sitting having a quiet dinner with a girlfriend and then these people come in and they sort of do agree to raise their fists and you can see some of them looking a little nervous when the chanting started to become fuck the police, you know, they are not sure I'm that way. But but now I know and I feel a sort of contempt for that those people because that is also the problem the problem is these people who are willing to go along with the crowd. Sam be told by the crowd what to do instead of standing up we say should do and say, excuse me. I'm trying to have a dinner with my girlfriend here. Fuck you, surely I agree with you, but I think those people are just in fear literally of their safety and possibly their life we've seen so many instances of people getting beaten up and stomped and kicked.


I'm sure you saw the one guy who got pulled out of his car and a guy ran up behind him and kicked him in the head and knocked him unconscious. I'm sure they're doing this it for people that have done nothing wrong. For no reason there's mobs a ballot e but but you know, you know as well as I do if you're in a restaurant in Washington DC and a beggar comes along and disturbs the Korean towel, you know, the restaurant staff will move the beggar along its today an ugly sight is an ugly, you know division exists, but if a mob comes into the restaurant the restaurant staff don't do anything either. I mean everyone is in fear of these mobs and at some point that has to stop at some point people have to say individually or as groups. We're not going along with that and you can't intimidate date us.


You just can't intimidate us. Well, that's what's scary about these things happening in places that have open carry for firearms. And so you're seeing that obviously in Kenosha when that 17 year old kid showed up with a gun and they attacked him and he shot and killed two people and this is this is a really scary moment where it could tip one way or the other and my fear is that after the election it tips in the worst way possible because I don't see I don't see up. Positive resolution left or right? I think if Biden wins people will be furious and if Trump wins people would be furious. Yeah. Well, you know, I I've always loved your country and I've spent quite a lot of time in it and but I do have to say watching it at the moment.


I mean, this is all this is all the basis for a civil war. Yeah, and I'm sure you know, you know that but I think a lot of people haven't quite realized this yet. This is all you know, my country went through this 400 years. Ago a fundamental debate over the nature of our state and our government and I seems to me you have a fundamental disagreement like that going on there. Now, you know a portion of the country doesn't believe in the founding principles. And another one holds them to be absolutely holy. I don't see how you reconcile that I agree with you and my friend Tim pool was talking about this over a year ago. He's saying I see this country headed to Civil War.


I was like, that's it. Hyperbolic, my that's kind of ridiculous. I thought he was just being silly. I thought he was just taking it too far like oh we'll be fine. But this was pre covid. This was pre I think covid is ramped up everything considerably because everyone so nervous and there's so many people out of work and there's so many people that have the time to do these things to show up in front of the mayor's office or the mayor's house and light it on fire in Portland because they don't have jobs there's nowhere to go to and there's also no hope and as they see these traditional Sirs, the traditional economic structure the traditional political structure as he sees things deteriorating. They're making their moves and this is where it gets really spooky because if they continue to do things like Chaz the six block place in Seattle mean that seemed like almost a little bit of a test a little bit of a test run.


I'm gonna get a Mad Max style takeover of six blocks in Seattle and held it for a considerable amount of time with the compliance of the mayor who called it the Summer of Love. I know what I saw I saw a video video of that of what happened after chairs and there were expose zombie like people lying around on the grass everything seemed to be covered in urine and there weren't any statues of see there are a hell of a lot of plinths and everything I graffiti over and I thought people should realize this is what you inherit the you'll inherit Rubble. Yeah to inherit piss-stained rubble and I'm not sure how many people have got that less than yet. Well, this should read your book the man is of crowd.


Excellent. It really is. It's a very good book and you know, you wrote that book before the shit really hit the fan but it was eerily accurate and in many ways when you were talking about the current problems and where they could lead and there's there's so much of what you were saying in that book that could be used as a like a guide to what's happening. That's what I hope time. I did it a year ago. I've updated it now and did you up? Well, basically because Has now is that it's out this month. Is that basically I thought something very interesting happened through the covid era which was that at the beginning of it.


I thought like we all thought okay. This is a plague like the Justinian plague. It's going to end the empire in it. We're all going to lose Matt and massive numbers of our loved ones. And if that's the case at least at these end times the social justice Warriors will pipe down. You know, there's my one consolation was I thought at least At least we won't have to deal with them so much because if everyone's got real problems, if everyone's got real complaints kind of micro aggressions start to seem less important than they have done in recent years. So that was my assumption that the beginning was if the plague was what it seemed at first then we hear less from these people and then my impression was that as as covid went on something very interesting happened, which was that our tolerance for the social justice activists diminished.


I mean, they're a little little things like little bits of light like Sam Smith, you know from his Mansion posts a photo of him sort of crying a bit and sort of more sad because he's lonely and normally that would be old Sam Smith they they is feeling bad and and and so on and there was just total of we don't care we don't care who is you know, Sam Smith is a British armed. So please you don't know of him who fills me with joy. He's got a horrible horrible. Whiny voice. He sang of the one of the worst bombed saw theme songs against some really stiff competition as you know, and it was one that the nobody had any how Sam Smith was the guy who came out as gay then as genderqueer and then as non-binary or look at me, look at me this case, he's coming he's coming out as look at me.


That's what she called. It should be called coming out as look. At me yeah, what the fuck is non-binary my God. So then he said he came out just look at me and then bit lazy wanted more attention. He posted a photo himself in his Mansion saying, you know how it's difficult. He was Finding covid and just there was a complete lack of empathy. Oh my God, and and I support things like that were a good sign, you know, because we go that's it. Yeah, it's best. We're all going to see a massive decline in our living standards and our whole societies have got mass unemployment and so on then I thought well, at least we'll Bit less than those guys and then several things happened. The first was that that some people started doing things along the following lines, as you know, and Madness are proud as I do each of these in turn.


Are you gay women that is relations between the Sexes race and trans and I noticed that the women thing came in first that people started saying things like women are suffering most from covid and I thought well, okay, we've got to look at the stats on this and then the stats came in and it showed that men were disproportionately likely to die. And then the same people said well the men like me doing the dying, but the women are doing the suffering or something and that didn't make very much sense, but it showed that there were some people who needed to look at this through the prison. They've looked through everything which is Women men disproportionate relations between the Sexes and then you got some people doing that with gay the BBC in my own country in Britain started running pieces about, you know, it's difficult for a lot of LGBT people because they're living with their families who might be homophobic and again, you know, you sort of read these stories if it well.


Yeah, a lot of people are living with their families who have will their families. I mean, they're having to live with their mom and dad and They might be heterosexual. They've just been forced into Chastity by government regulations. You know that you know them is difficult for everyone. Yeah, why do we need single that out? Then? There was a story about somebody who I kid you not by the way, Joe you'll love this one the BBC had a story which was of a trans person. Who said I'm all right, that line was I'm I'm I'm fearful that I'm going to be buried in the wrong gender. Oh boy. And of course, I just thought what a lot of other just fearful of being buried, you know period yeah, please call me a woman when I'm dead.


I don't wanna fuck you can misgender me all you like after I just I don't want to be buried that's not so crazy. Not this year. Not this year. There's so much so that sort of thing started happening. I thought oh, this is just there just but again, I still thought they'll double down but the majority won't listen to them. Then Minnesota happened and the race one came back with a vengeance and that had been happening through covid obviously because in all of our countries we had this thing of ethnic minorities Vicki black people suffering disproportionately from the virus.


And what I was worried about was that in the American media and the British media and elsewhere. This was being portrayed as if as if the if this was the case and it does seem to be then it was because like America couldn't even import a virus from China without giving it its own special racist spin, you know that all of the things that you could look at to explain why there might be a higher mortality rate including higher numbers of have nurses in the Health Service underlying health issues and much more that that wasn't You focus on it kept on being portrayed as if this could only be because of racism and and that just worried me.


So thought even a virus pandemic can't bring us together and we still have these people doing this but as I say wasn't till after Minnesota that then that really took off and we discovered something very important, which is that but that racism and the whole issue of race is even more important than trying to avoid the pandemic and and that that and everything flowed from it is just rolling on and on and it's very very worrying. It's everything I feared would happen which was everybody doubling down on these identity traits in the era when we all hoped. We could move Beyond them.


You know, we also got to this weird point where we're supposed to collectively ignore the fact that having 50,000 people marching through the streets arm and arm could easily Be spreading the disease and there was this giant uptick of the disease in America and everyone stuff their head in the sand and pretended they were not connected. Well wanted to pretend well it had nothing to do with the protest. Well, if you even more yeah, it's clear more. It wasn't it wasn't just reading this and it actually saying that we don't mind. I'm in the medical medical professionals in America who signed the joint lesser defending people going out on the protests were saying that that racism And kills and so does covid but racism is a clearly a bigger underlying risk than covid and if you've taken that view.


Then everything is possible, isn't it? I mean, I mean, I mean about the fact it's not it's clean not true. Because however you would you know, work out the numbers of people killed by racism which does exist. But I mean, there's a to claim that the mortality rates from racism up are higher than those from covid. When what are the figures in American? I know six figures of people who've Hyundai 19,000 is under 90,000, you know, I guess it's Only the people who claimed that racism kills more people than covid should have to answer and say where are the hundred and ninety thousand racist murders in America this year.


You know and that doesn't happen and that's medical professionals saying that well, you've got everyone terrified of being labeled as a racist that yes, that's where we've gotten to this point. How we've gotten to this point. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we live in an era where all of the all of the worst things you can be accused of are also not provable and not disprovable and that's something I say in The Madness of crowds, which is just very difficult for you know, it happens every day to someone, you know, I mean someone Is called the whole charge sheet but homophobic transphobic misogynist racist. And first of all, obviously people can level that without any evidence and often knowing that it's not true.


But the problem is the person who is said to has no defense because you cannot actually prove you're not a racist. You can't prove you're not a misogynist. You can't prove you're not a homophobic happens all the time. People say, you know, I'm not a homophobe, you know, it happened with the former Australian prime minister the other day. I'm not a homophobe. My sister-in-law's a lesbian. She married her partner and I was at the wedding but they still say he's a homophobe, you know, you can't prove right but the claim isn't true. And the worst of that is obviously with racism is so obviously everybody in the era is trying desperately to avoid the claim because once the claim is made we our society has no way to brush it off. Yeah. I've been there having conversations lately with people about the term hate speech and it brings me back to a conversation that I had with.


And who work for YouTube? This was just randomly at a party. I happen to be with someone who worked for you for YouTube and I was talking to them about some of the problems with YouTube and suppression particularly at the time. There was a person who had taken a conversation with you and Sam Harris and they had put it on their playlist. I believe I talked to you about this did I not they put it on their playlist and they got a flag for violating the community guidelines just from putting that conversation with you and Sam Harris. I brought this up to her and she immediately dismissive Lee said well that was because it's hate speech and so then I got upset. I had a couple glasses of wine in me and I was like, what are you waiting?


Why do you just sit tell me what was the content of the conversation? Why do you think my wife is squeezing my leg under the table? Because she thinks I'm about to go ballistic. I'm like, how do you how can you just flippantly say, this is hate speech you're talking about to public intellectuals who are discussing all sorts of intricate and nuanced issues. And you're just saying it's Hate speech and that you're justifying its Community guidelines strike on his persons Channel who just had it on their playlist. Like this is an interesting conversation that I enjoyed. I'm going to put this in my playlist whether I agree or disagree. It's inspired thought. Yeah, but that's I mean, this is the one of the most Sinister things of the time as you know, I'd do a chapter on Tech in the book and spend some time in Silicon Valley trying to work out what the hell's going on if there's a big underlying thing.


Got on here Joe. I mean, I think it's that in all of our countries the people in charge of as it were what correct opinion is have managed to draw their lines in a way that excludes majority opinions. And that is I mean, it's sustainable. I suppose it obviously is for some people as a business model based of disaster for our societies. I mean, you know, if you decide that that talking about certain issues is beyond the pale on each of these subjects and you know, you could do that if it was a wildly minority held opinion, but actually, I mean most people for instance don't think men have to just never talk about women, but most people think the Is need to get on I'm among them.


It's not my personal area of study. But but it's it's you know, I know I know I reckon that men and women have to be able to have to be able to thrive and have relationships without this being this this this unbelievable landmine a territory and yet and yet the social media companies decide low even to talk around any of them necessary but difficult staff must comprise hate speech and therefore we and And what they don't seem to realize is but you're keeping majorities concerns and thoughts and conversations out and you've got you just can't you know, it's it's it's long term. It's an unsustainable thing to do.


It's also a minority perspective minority perspective that's deciding to censor the discussion between two enormous groups of people the people that are on the left and the people there on the right your siding entirely with the people on the left and decided Adding that the people on the right should be silenced in many of these cases and I think many of the people on the left don't agree with that because there's a lot of people on the left that would like to have freedom of speech is a core tenet of this culture. It's annoying us. It's how we work things out and if you say I disagree so shut them up. Well, you fucked this whole thing up because the whole rig the whole way.


This works is people have to State their argument debate discuss it and then the People that are objected or on the outside or on the fence. They get to look at it and go. Well this guy's making a lot of sense, you know, I used to be this but now I might be leaning more towards being a Centrist or more towards being libertarian and work towards being a liberal or whatever the fuck it is that's convincing to you and whoever makes the most convincing argument whether it's Noam Chomsky or whether it's Ben Shapiro. Whoever the makes the most convincing argument for you. You're allowed to take that side. You're allowed to incorporate those opinions. You're allowed to consider them and you And everybody censored and here also, by the way, I mean one that really troubles me is if you should be magnanimous in Victory.


I mean that is that that is so soft is so striking to me in the one I do first of the issue of gay which is that we are currently in the tech companies are doing this are pretending. First of all that our current views on trans is gay marriage, which I was an early supporter of but that if you weren't for gay marriage before almost anyone else was you're now a homophobe, right and and apart from the fact that doesn't seem reasonable. It's an unbelievably on magnanimous thing to do in Victory, you know to sort of stalker and I give some examples of this a really prominent figures and television and elsewhere in the state's who you know in the 2000s weren't in favor of gay marriage.


What do you talk about Barak Obama wasn't in favor of gay marriage at that stage, but but they're already Going back like this and say you didn't hold in the past views that people hold now for and this this this goes against one of the absolute Central tenets, which is you know, boot on the other foot is MM, you know gay rights, like all other rights movements managed to advance because it said, you know, you may not want to do this but we're not asking you to do this. We're looking for the right to live our own lives this way too and then there's this terrible moment and I say it happens in every rights claim the territory table moment when equal doesn't seem to do it for some people and they say no now we've got the upper hand.


We're going to behave to you in a way that we would have hated when you did it to us. Yes, and we're going to make you a non-person and we're going to see you can't even Gather in private places and you can't even talk to each other online or on the Internet. This is the profound Leah liberal Viewpoint and it's being done by people in the name of liberalism. It really is and its people Fringes that are the loudest and these are the ones that are causing people to be most upset and ironically making people lean towards the right. They're saying these people on the left are out of control because the people that are on the left at their hearing from are the ones that are outrageous, they're not the ones that are reasonable set Mo left of center and the you just have opinions that most of us believe about civil unions about Libya about gay rights civil rights about, you know, women's rights all the different areas that people We'll think of when they think of people on the left I support all those until you get to these far far left people that are so loud and outrageous.


They want to get rid of the police and get rid of the laws and everyone should be a communist like whoa, whoa. Whoa and that's making people go right it's for young people because the right enforcing people ironically towards Donald Trump. The more people have said it freaked the fuck out over here the more they go who's going to protect us from this shit. What's that guy? He's the only guy The number of friends of mine in America who are saying exactly this privately at the moment. I don't know anyone who says well, maybe I know a couple but I don't know very many people who say I just love Donald Trump and everything about him and his character is just so good and he's just he's just obviously the sort of person I'd like my children to grow up to want to be nobody says no, I think we look at him and the same way a lot of people in the left at least up until recently we're looking at and Tifa a lot of people on the left were looking at and T feel like they're doing our Dirty Work they're doing they're doing their the hard far-left people they are pushing it so far that'll make room for my ideology because they'll clear the path and they'll silence and eliminate all these horrible right-wing people that I don't agree with.


I think they think that about Trump that like, he's not my guy. I don't think the way he thinks but that guy is not going to let that shit fly and he's gonna step in and yeah, he might be a liar. And you might be full of shit and you might have done terrible things in business and he you know, he might have lied about the destructive consequences of covid and all these other issues that people have problems with him. But at least he's not those guys. Yeah, I mean on almost any issue. This is the case that there was there was this in the John Bolton Memoir that is rather hair-raising story of President Trump talking with our then prime minister and it becomes clear that Donald Trump doesn't know that the UK is a nuclear power.


Exchange he standing in checkers the Country House of the British prime minister. The Russians had just done this Nava takatak installs who they took out his former agent and his daughter with this unbelievably, you know toxic of the doorknob write the exact doorknob. Yes. Classic KGB tactics you use the most dangerous biological Cool weapon in order to demonstrate that you can yeah. Anyhow that it just happened in a little little the cathedral city of Salisbury Theresa May the then prime minister says to Donald Trump in checkers, you know, mr. President. I'd like to remind you that we in Britain regard this as a wmd attack and what's more she says looking at him meaningfully a wmd attack on the nuclear power.


And on top 10 is to one of the other people with three semesters if you got nukes. Okay, the some striking and yeah. Yeah the point about this is that you hear this sort of story and you think well that's shocking but not that surprising and anything but anyway, look what else is being offered and this this this thought is just obviously going through everyone's Minds because the left and America has screwed up so badly they could have it's so striking to me as an outsider. They could have spent Last four years saying how did this person with all of these these character traits that we sort of agreed on that.


We don't like and with lots of downsides and think how did he win anyway, and they could have looked at that right and work and work so much out and instead you've had four Wasted Years of you know, frankly bullshit claims that have wasted everyone's time. We believe that something very similar in Britain, but I just it's horrifying for outside of the see this I think they thought those claims were going to work. I think they thought the Russia Scandal was going to work. I think this off his Affairs we're going to ruin him. I think they thought all these various chest pieces that they moved into position that they thought they were at Checkmate multiple times and he's like not fuck you and they're like what like and he just keeps on keeping on and I just don't think they I don't think they correctly estimated his resilience nor did they estimate the way people Who support him would view him and I again, I think there's a lot of people that don't agree with him don't like his tactics don't like his personality, but they see him as the preferable alternative to what's going on in Portland.


What's going on in Seattle and what happens when you get lawlessness, I mean, it's not even like he's very good and effective what he claims to want to do. You know, that's most obvious critique of him is you know, he'll tweet something but he won't act on it. He doesn't he said he knows big one big lever to pull but he's got no idea of how to work out the intricacies of all the little levers you need to know about to run an effective Administration and that's that's like reason will critique and everyone can see it there seems to be some problem. He finds it very hard. As you know one can't help noticing that job retention is a problem in the White House basically average length of employment.


Is like a mug is like a month, but for the point of even despite that because of what the left has done and what it's allowed to happen. What is allowed to rush through? We now see people who've got who know every single critique you can make of Donald J Trump and will still vote for her. Yes. No, I agree. It's shocking to watch it. All he tweets things. Sometimes that you what you go. What the fuck is he doing? He tweeted tweeted a video from my podcast where Mike Tyson was talking about when he hurts people it becomes orgasmic for him Donald Trump with no context with no comment tweeted that And some friends of mine were sending it to me.


Like what the fuck is going on and I went and looked at the video. I was like, what did he really tweet this like, what does that mean? What is he saying? Is he saying that he finds it orgasmic when he beats on his opponents? Like what is he saying is he just does he just think it's interesting? I don't know. If you can just do that. Look I could do that. You could do that. If you saw something Preposterous or ridiculous, you could just tweet like look at this. This is nuts. He probably would say something like oh my Then post that you could do that. But when you're the Goddamn president of the greatest superpower the world has ever known you the Commander in Chief of the biggest army, the planet has ever seen and he just yeah tweet a thing about one of the greatest heavyweight boxers of all time talking about getting orgasmic when he beats the fuck out of people.


This is like what well, where are we living in? What is happening? Yeah. Yeah. We should we should we should try now. We should talk about something orgasmic and see. If we can get him to retweet well might be a pattern emerging he's been retweeting a lot of my stuff lately for some strange reason. He tweeted a video the other day where I said that to me Joe Biden is like having a flashlight with a dying battery and going on a long walk in the woods. It's not going to work out and that's that's that's how I felt. Yeah, I feel bad for Biden I do I really do and I feel bad for the left that they've got to pretend that. This is a good choice.


But you know, there's there's just one obvious thing though joke. I mean again an outsider, but you you can't you can't have a future if you hate your past. You you you can't have a future if you disagree on the foundational principles of the state and watching senior members of the democratic party being asked for instance if they'll condemn the bringing down of statues of George Washington and watching them trying to dodge the question. It's just heartbreaking because that is the terrain which America used to be able to agree on here to watch a CNN presenter stand on MSNBC standing in front of Mount Rushmore and saying as one of them did the president is going to give a speech tonight in front of statues of slave owners on the stolen ground.


that Mount Rushmore you used to you used to have to agree on that used to be able to agree on on Roosevelt and you know and and Lincoln and he used to be proud of these people and and you had good reason to be proud of oh you assure you they were critiques as well because there always are because amazingly people in history aren't as perfect as all of us living today and thinking we're right but you know used to be able to agree that these people were Honorable Men and do Penguins men and people who had done an extraordinary thing in creating the United States of America and and if you don't think that's extraordinary if you don't think that okay, there are people who can think that America isn't exceptional but to think that America is only exceptional in being exceptionally evil.


Well, then then you don't have a future if that idea catches on and it seems to have caught on on a significant suede of the American left. It's also talking about Mount Rushmore describing it as statues of former slave owners on Stolen land that's such a simplistic perspective on who those people were. Yeah, they did own slaves. And yeah this land did used to belong to indigenous people but there's there's that that story it's very disingenuous to tell that story in one sentence. It's yeah, it's a very complex tale of a different era. It's of a different time and of people seeking to try to figure out and carve out a new form of democracy a an experiment in self-government that never existed before and they succeed.


Thanks. Exactly exactly. I know I'm I'm just stunned by this because it's happening everywhere, but it's happening in America farthest and fastest and it's this thing but we of looking at the past as a savanna of grievances, we want to you know hack through and find and then use you know, as if as if the past is just there for this purpose and as you know, I'm not I write a bit a bit about this man's of crowds about how we can get to a more reasonable attitude towards the past because if we got her more reasonable attitude towards the past we'd also have a more reasonable attitude towards our present, you know, we know better how we ought to be behaving now because we might among other things have a Amount of damn humility.


Yeah be a bit less assertive and dogmatic. You know, they wouldn't it be good if we if we realized that people in the past. Even even the best people acted given the knowledge they had in the circumstances. They found themselves in you know, they weren't sort of involving themselves in some abstract experiment to see if they could pass muster in 2020. Right and and it's almost as if our societies have taught a form of History which isn't interested in doing that and as a result, we're not interested in doing it on our own lives and realizing all of us are going to make mistakes or what do you do about that?


You hope that people can be forgiving and you hope you use hope you can be to some degree forgiving of people in the past when they acted in ways, you don't approve of now because you also hope that people who come after us looked look at us with a certain amount of forgiveness because there will be things we're doing now that are insane. In fact, I can I can guess a few and people after us we would hope would look at us and think well, maybe they did them not because they were evil people but because they were acting on the knowledge they had and certain presumptions. They have which we now know to be wrong. Yeah, that's a very accurate way of assessing it and I think that it's difficult to be reasonable and balanced and forgiving today because it's a it's an uphill battle where as being someone who's to Virtue signals who uses social media who attacks.


That is that that's the accelerant that I see on the situation today and so many people and so many groups. Diving in it's like there was a thing on the UN the other day posted something about covid and about the coronavirus pandemic and they use it as an opportunity to condemn the patriarchy did you see that? Yeah, I did the American Psychological Association ought to refer itself. I think it's it's one of the strange things because this is the second time in a year, isn't it? Because it was American Psychological Association that last year. Described masculinity as toxic. Yeah, and I mean I pity all the young men who are being referred to people approved of by the American Psychological Association who are telling them that being a man is bad, you know, and that masculinity is bad.


I really pity the people who are going to have to grow up with that kind of rubbish evil rubbish being told to them and it's the same with this the American Psychological Is saying that was everything in America is is built on white supremacy. Like what do you do with a claim like that? And and why should a body that that had some respect? I mean had some standing it still as I understand it is is the body that has to approve anyone in the u.s. Who's going to practice in Psychology. What do you do and that body says there's something fundamentally wrong with being a man and there's something fundamentally evil about being white.


What do you do in a society where sit formally serious? Organizations are saying that well, I think what's happening now is the thing that everyone was criticizing years ago about what was happening in Academia. What's happening in the schools the silencing of conservative speakers and blowing air horns and pulling fire alarms. People were making that out to be no big deal like all your make. It's Much Ado About Nothing. This is a small amount of occurrences and universe. These and then the Brett Weinstein thing happened at Evergreen and everybody went. Wow, that is Extreme. But again, it's a small strange College in the Pacific Northwest. But what we're seeing is the chickens coming home to roost All These Warnings that all these people in Academia like Brett Weinstein and like others, you know, Peter bogosian and many others James Lindsay who had seen this coming they're like this is going to be a real problem because these people are going to enter the workforce.


They're going to enter Society. They're going to be 23 24 25 years old and they're going to be telling people what to do and they're going to be dictating policy and they're going to be forcing people to shape Society in this idea and we're seeing yeah, you know, the one of the things was also conservatives were under estimating this. Yes. Well, I mean, you know because conservatives when they talked about the campus stuff there was a kind of easy easy joke on it which was that and I've made it myself, you know, which was basically that, you know, your daughter goes away to college you. Mortgage the house. She goes to study lesbian dance and then she graduates and discovers.


There aren't very many jobs in lesbian dance. And so, you know, she then realizes the error of her ways and becomes a conservative that was sort of the background idea that conservatives had about this that the market would assert itself. And of course that turned out to be totally wrong there were jobs for these people to go. Go to even gone they've got they filled job after job and roll after roll. They have they have washed through major former newspapers in the u.s. Like the New York Times They have washed across the cultural institutions in all of our countries.


They have the you know you if we'd be speaking even five years ago. You would've thought well Corporate America is not going to fall for that. They're not going to be held hostage by the people with you know that Croc degrees in Norm disciplines, but yeah, they're the corporates all are and they all encourage the growth of their HR departments and they're packed with people who now can hold an entire company hostage. I see this in the publishing industry. I mean JK Rowling, you know, Harry Potter fan. She's got this book coming out for kids called vehicle bog and a hundred and fifty or so staff at her Publishers as hatchette.


Threaten to walk out because they said they couldn't be work if it couldn't justify working for a publisher that brought out a book by JK Rowling because JK Rowling has expressed perfectly mainstream and decent and reasonable views about where trans rights appears to cross over and tread on women's rights. And you know, I'm surprisingly most of the people who signed that letter we're young, but the problem with it was that on that occasion the CEO actually stood by JK Rowling because she's very very Successful by the world's most successful author and at the moment at that very very top level sometimes not all the time the money speaks but nobody turned around and said the only thing that needed to be said which was you know, you're not even at a publishing house.


That's publishing JK Rowling's big book of trans, you know, so it's not chicks with dicks by JK Rowling. It's it it's the Ichabod. Yeah, and if you cannot work in office that's publishing the Ichabod. You're probably not just not cut out for this profession, but probably not cut out for this life. You're going to find life really tricky if the kicker bog terrifies you and what's more the CEO of a company in that position should by now have said thank you so much for your letter.


I take it to be a resignation. Should letter and in the next day's newspaper. There should have been 150 openings at that publisher for people who wanted to work in the business of ideas and thought and what is so striking is that even on the ones where people hold the line they are not saying what needs to be said, which is we cannot be as Societies or as companies or as cultural entities. We cannot be held hostage by Fundamentally dishonest hostile actors and we certainly can't be held hostage at the risk of just one person because that's all it requires. Just one person saying the ichabod's to mean for me.


That's what we can't operate like that. We can't exchange ideas like that. And what she's saying should be debated if you disagree with what she's saying about trans rights entering into the realm or suppressing women's rights. This should be a conversation that people have the idea that you're going to silence literally the most popular author alive today because you has a very reasonable position. It's crazy. It's Madness and this is this is the same attitude that sled 2D platforming people with reasonable views is the same attitude that It is infuriating people to the point where they're going to vote the opposite way and vote for people like Donald Trump.


I mean, this is what's happening. But I'm also you know, I'm worried about so many things is one is one. Is it by the way the reason why I've written about this, which is that I want people to know the scale of this plot rows and Lindsay and bogosian others have done an amazing job on this but you know because you really you need to do you want among other things to save people the hassle of Having to read the crap that's were talking about. I mean, you don't want the smartest minds of this generation having to Wade their way through Judith Butler on feminism and performativity of gender. You know, I mean almost anything is better to do with your life than that.


And so to an extent what is needed is these books and these people saying as I try to say look, this is what it is. For God's sake don't get caught up in it. Don't get stuck on it. Like don't waste your life looking to solve the world through these means because all you will do is make yourself and everyone around you much much more unhappy, but also, you know, we all in our lives definitely have something more important to do than talk endlessly about gender, you know, we almost certainly all have in our lives something more important to do than to talk endlessly about three characteristics over which we have no say in one of the best takes on this in my opinion has been Helen pluck Rose Peter goes in and James Lindsay when they did these grievance studies and some of their more Preposterous ideas and papers didn't just get reviewed but got awarded like yeah that bodybuilding and instances of homoerotic rape culture and dog parks like the great one was the rewriting of a section of Ryan Kemp using using some feminist.


Jargon. Yeah, and it was republished as their struggle my struggle. Oh my god, of course, we've got and we've course it got to credit the penis as a as a social construct. Yes has to be the greatest the greatest work of literature of recent decades. And also that would get that vast was quite something. It's amazing what God passed but the reaction once it was found out. I mean Peter almost lost his job like this many of these people have been attacked. It's it's they didn't have any sense of humor on how Preposterous know their own position is No, and and they couldn't defend it at all. No, I mean we've heard for years peer review as this, you know secrets that's thing and all these papers got peer-reviewed and they all got punk and the papers are amazing.


They were amazing and all they did was turn on the people who did it. But by the way, that's that's the absolutely typical thing of the time and that I mean, that's why I think that those of us who do have the ability to talk about this stuff and it's weird why we do but those of us who survived and are able to sort of not be stopped by the mob have to talk about these things because it can't be made this impossible. Yes. It just men cannot be stopped from talking about women white people cannot fear any discussion about race because of the fear of being called a racist by dishonest people, you know, the straight people can't live in fear of being called homophobes or transphobes.


And we just made the cost of entry into the discussion too high. In fact, we made it so high that nobody really wants to go into it, but I think it's because they don't really want a discussion they want compliance and that seems to be a big part of what this is all about. It's about compliance. It's about forcing those people to raise their fists at the restaurant. This is it's not about real change. It's about in the moment compliance. You want your ideas to win out and it's this natural inclination people have when they're playing a game. You want to get checkmate you want to win? You know, this is this is what's happening with people today. Yeah. Now the that's taken quite a long time for some people to work out that what we're dealing with is is very often is dishonest people who want to win and are willing to just use any maneuver in the meantime and I talked about this but it might have been actually on the on the thing which your contact at YouTube talked about that talked about with Sam Harris before which was you know, I said to him was just the moral.


Easily, why don't you and I say that all the people who criticize us of pedophiles. Why don't we just say whenever they say like Sam Harris is the worst person in the world and Douglas Maris. Is that terrible bigger? Why don't we just say? Well, it's a shame. You can't stop shagging kids, you know and and and and and went and when they then say what how dare you then we can say. Oh, I'm sorry. I thought we were doing that. I thought we were just throwing around crazy. The attempts to end each other's careers. I thought that was the game we played I'm sorry, I'd miss taken it we could maybe we'd both like to step back a moment never this. The point is a fundamental reason why we don't which is that for a lot of us.


We are holding on and tenuously in some cases holding on to the idea that we can continue to have reasonable discussion and reasonable debates with honest actors and that therefore to lie knowingly about other people would be a bad thing to do in a wrong thing to do. Actually, no, I do think that's the case because I think he wouldn't know when to stop and that's what we're seeing. And that's what we're seeing. That is one departs the far left. They don't know when to stop because they've been given the moat they've been given the most powerful tools of the time which is to accuse people of all the things that our society and pause our Society abhors racism in a pause homophobia to pause misogyny.


And so if you're given the tools to wield and you wield them dishonestly you don't know when to stop that's that's that's why they've done it all these years against all these people but the obvious the obvious thing to breakthrough here is how can people not be vulnerable. Yes to the dishonest claims and how do I get out of this? How do we get out of this mess? Exactly and you know, I'm afraid that we also we cannot put any any faith in the idea which some people have faith in which is that, you know, people will kind of learn it'll get nasty enough. Because well you can see in Kenosha and elsewhere some people might see an exit wound of a bullet from somebody's head for the first time in their life and think I'm stepping back from this Abyss, but other people will see it and quite like what they see quite like the power that they wield quite like the darkness.


They've just trotting into so I have no faith in this hope that you know again, it's a bit of a conservative ho quite often that people will Reason because they'll see the the pandemonium and and the chaos that isn't the case a lot of people see the pandemonium and the chaos and they think or let me in. And every mug shot from Portland Oregon demonstrates, yes, every mug shot. These are chaotic people. You've LED chaotic like yes and threatening them that they are going to live more chaotic lives isn't going to work this stage. They're there in the abyss. They're working very happily there. So it's everybody who's not yet gone there but needs to try to work out what to do.


And you know one thing one thing I honestly do stick with is don't Um, don't don't be portrayed as things you're not and don't be cowed by allegations that are insincere. I would like to see more rage from people who are being in sincerely accused of things are not guilty of I rather you have a Joan Rivers one of the sharpest comedians I've ever seen Joan Rivers was once in a discussion on the radio in my country with a far left sort of black power activists called darcus Howe and this is about 20 years ago, and it was a spellbinding moment of radio because there was a discussion.


It was just you know, she had something of the torture cell he had something to sell and they would just have me on the same program and at some point darcus Howe said, you know Joan seems to have a problem with me as a person and I think it has to do with race. It was something along these lines and you should listen to it. Joan Rivers just went for him. She's she said How dare you how dare you you son of a bitch and she went for him and she ate him on air and the visceral rage. She demonstrated what was being attempted against her in the studio is the visceral rage that everybody should use when that move is played against them that we shouldn't just brush it off and say oh, well, it happens.


We say, how dare you how dare you demean a meaningful currency? How dare you demean a meaningful term how dare you push our entire Society to a point? It will come to at some point, which would be we don't care. How dare you speed that day along in the name of anti racism or anything else or in the name of winning an argument winning an argument just for the short term. It's so commonplace to win for the short term. You just create hell for the long. I think what you're saying about the people in Portland is so accurate in anyone who's looked at those mug shots.


It's one of the first things that they they get from it, like look at these people. Look unhealthy, they look lost the guy who shot the man in Portland has this black power tattoo on his neck. And when you you hear him talk, I know if you saw the interview with him and vice vice interviewed him before the police shot him. Yeah. I saw that he's clearly a lost person who probably led a life that was filled with mistakes and fuck-ups and then he finds himself in the situation where he has a gun in the middle of chaos, and he's literally got his hand on his gun running around stalking Trump supporters and finds one that's willing to engage him and shoots the guy and kills him but you know this this we had a couple of weeks of this in the UK where it looked like it might run away with us, you know, the police were literally chased down a street in Westminster by crowd shouting run piggy run and it was a very concerning moment, but we Managed to step back from the brink and it seems interesting to me that America couldn't around the same time and there might be lots of reasons for that.


But one which mystifies me miss a not got the answer to it is why America has so many people in exactly that position. You just described like very very lost people. Yeah, I don't have the answer to that. I think it's a numbers game. I think there's so many of us over here. There's 320 plus million people if just 1% of them were lost. You've got three million plus people that are lost. That's a lot of people you gather them together in large cities and you give them bull horns and bats and have them screaming against the fascists. Whatever the fuck that means and they all the sudden have a family all of a sudden their United and that's what I saw and Chaz the six-block area of see Battle that they took over they felt like they had they had done something they had achieved something and I think that's what you're seeing now in Portland when these people are walking on the street marching and cheering together for a lot of these people.


This is the most exciting moment of their lives. They're joined together this chaos, there's fire. There's screaming streets occasionally people get murdered. I mean, it's pretty wild stuff and it feels like you're in history, you know, it feels like you're making history. Yeah, but this is what I you know, I give this this analogy. I lift it from a late Australian philosopher Coleman. Oh, but this way I talk about what George in retirement syndrome and it's a Georgian retirement syndrome is is I think what a lot of campaigners are stuck in at the moment, which is that the basically the situation since George would be in after he'd got the Acclaim of slaying the Dragon.


He might be tempted to go around the land looking for other dragons to slay and if there aren't dragons, he might be found attacking smaller and smaller animals until eventually one day. Since George can be found swinging his sword at thin air. Now. I don't say that. There's absolutely thin air but there's some Georgian retirement syndrome clearly exists for a portion of young people in America and particular because they've been told that And and the problem is this is sort of right in lots of ways and like who wouldn't have wanted to have been with Martin Luther King and the March on Washington, you know who wouldn't have wanted to have had the pleasure and the satisfaction of being the head of a movement like that who you know, I mean, I have said one particular myself, but lots of people have been told, you know, you should have been at the Stonewall Inn in 1968, or you should have burned your bra.


Ha with the second wave feminists, you know, and they miss this stuff because all of these movements have been Vindicated massively and the people who did partake in them have got a very serious advantage in society because they are viewed with respect for rightly for having been ahead of their time of for being brave and so on but it means that in 2020. We have people who think that they are still slaying dragons. And switch at the very least by now. I just not that powerful dragons at the very least. I don't know how this ends and Portland to me is the most interesting petri dish.


Because the fact that you have the most Progressive mayor and they're still like fuck you not good enough. My eyes are on that place in particular because Portland's always been a real kind of an oddball place and I always enjoy going there actually love Portland. It's one of my favorite places to perform the most most of the people there are very nice. But there's a Madness going on there. You want to talk about Madness of crowds that that is that exemplifies that right now and it's the to me there. Arrested people for lighting forest fires up there. They've arrested arrested left-wing people for writing these forest fires, you know are quote activists and this is something that's also not widely being reported that people have actually been arrested for lighting fires up there.


This is the I don't know what like if I would love to talk to the mayor and say what is your strategy for ending this so you hoping this is going to die down like because they these people want your head they want blood. And they don't they don't seem to be willing to settle for anything less and the more they receive no resistance from him the the more adamant they get about his his resigning and that all I mean, I've been waiting quite a lot about revolutions recently for obvious reasons, and it's it's a good time to do it. I highly recommend this one reading which would read well lots of books on the Russian Revolution 1917 and Of course everything on the French Revolution always remains person at mainly because of just the the unchanging nature of our species, you know, it always happens in similar ways.


I mean, you know the beginning of the Russian Revolution in 1917 people who weren't on the side of the revolutionaries, but didn't want to get hurt would affixed to their sleeves, you know signs of the Revolution so that the mob would leave them alone. And what is what is people doing blackout day on Instagram? Yeah, and all of that but that in the technological age, but sometimes that doesn't even work. Did you see the Kenosha business that had a giant billboard that said black lives matter and yet it was in Flames. I loved that one early on I you shouldn't say you loved it. But I did of those sort of three jocks who are in a in an apartment and they were kind of going yeah, fuck that lies matters in it.


And then there's all the windows gets mad. Ashton and they're sort of shouting we're on your side on your side the smash shows you what is really going on? It shows you what's really going on and I think that quite a lot of people have been in a performative stage. They've been in a performative stage with they've done their stuff of saying well, you know America is a racist society. And of course, we live in a slightly white supremacist society and they did all of that and now they've got to this other stage when when the rubber hits the road and when people start to act on it because they Event and this is the most dangerous stage and I mean one of the things of course is all the people pushing. This now will not survive the revolution.


None of them will survive. That's what you learned from 1789 in France among other places all the people who push it and by the way, it's also always for the same reason that they're in when the assembly meets After the Revolution and they immediately start to talk about the Rights of Man and the rights that they're all going to acquire. They don't talk about laws. Why because it's it's easier and happier to talk about rights and they've cut off the laws for another day and then you get everything including the terror and everybody everybody seam by seam of the revolution is taken out.


And what's amazing watching America at this stage is the the Revolutionary seem to know that they're playing history again, you saw this sucks this scene where they built a guillotine outside the the house. Yeah of what was it? Yeah, Jeff Bezos. Yeah. We don't need very many more. Choose you know as to what these people are trying to do and aiming to do they actually seem to look at these cultural revolutions and and think that seemed to go well, why don't we try that again? Yeah, it's it's it's very confusing to me because I don't know how we get out of it.


I don't see any map of the territory that that seems like all we have to do is band together on these critical issues and just agree that we could speak civilly and discuss things and debate things and I don't see any of that. I don't I think there are answers to get out of it. I think is a very obvious one by the way, which is staring everyone in the face. Should in all of our countries we have this term the silent majority, you know, yes, everyone's always talking about the silent majority. The number of people in recent weeks who said to me look I know this person who owns a business they make you know, and is literally see things like, you know, make freely flowers or something or they make doilies or you know, it was always sort of something completely harmless.


And somebody finds out that they didn't make a statement on black lives matter and bang the thing comes for them so that so the always hear the same story So eventually they did and eventually posted the right thing and they said the right thing and they bowed and they took the money and they raise the Fist and they dance themselves, but my suggestion is why is the majority silent? Why why does it only speak if it speaks at elections? Why once you work out what the force? I mean, you know this some MMA but we just we haven't worked out fast enough. We should have done by now. But our entire Society is being knocked off kilter by a by a very small number of people hitting very very hard at the margins.


And that is answerable but it is only answerable if that majority stops being silent. It's not answerable. If a few people scattered around the globe are allowed to talk about the difficult issues of the day. It's only answerable if the silent majority stops being silent and that means Nothing less than a mass Act of resistance of people against the dishonest actors. It is to speak up and say I will not for instance go through indoctrination training at my workplace. I will not I will not be made to sit in a workshop with somebody who knows less than me telling me to educate myself.


I will not continue to be humiliated in this fashion and there are various ways. You can do that the Threatening by the way, and it's not a nice one. But the most threatening is to say I will not partake in the re racialization of my society and the attacks on people by racial group. Whatever that grouping is. I will not attack black people as a mass. I will not attack white people as a mass. I will not talk on these terms. And if that happened at every corporation in America, this could stop and the only reason it doesn't stop is because the majority has been coward.


That's why I go I go back to that woman in the restaurant in Washington. Everybody could say I understand legitimate grievances, but I will not be cowed by people who are at this stage trying to bully an entire Society to go along silently with a project. We cannot agree to I can probably agree with you. But when I think about human nature and I think about the way people have reacted so far to this kind of outrage. I just don't see it happening people are terrified of repercussions and that's what And there's real repercussions for saying reasonable things.


There was a broadcaster that was asked about black lives matter and he said all lives matter all of them and he was fired. Yeah the idea that you can live in a world where you say something that reasonable it's not like he said no black lives do not matter. He did not say that he said all lives matter and to which most people would say, you're correct so that you're also saying black lives matter. Yes, I am but Like lives matter White lives matter women lives matter gay lives matter trans lives matter. Everyone's life matters everyone, but you can't say that. It's it's a movement that has no opposition. I mean nobody is opposing the fundamental premise.


Nobody says black lives don't matter, right but the problem and if this guy gets fired, no one wants to hire him back because he was fired for for not going along with black lives matter so he might go through a period of years without being employed again. Yeah, well, it's gonna follow him around that absolutely anything that'll happen one by one it like that you like that Netflix guy who used the n-word as an example of a word not to use, you know the case. Well the amazing because I'm a good friend of mine that case was because my good friend Tom Segura. Tom Segura is a very good friend of mine and he was using the term retard saying that you're not supposed to say that anymore.


It was part of a bit about words that you're not supposed to. To say anymore. So he says that word. So this man who was an executive at Netflix says essentially that word is like saying the n word to black people, but he actually said the word in a meeting and they were like off of his head. You said Abracadabra, you said it out loud. You can't even acknowledge it as a word. He wasn't calling anyone it he was just saying the word out loud and that was enough and I don't believe they were really outraged as much as I believe they could go after him for that. They knew that. They found a window. They had a rock. They threw it the guise of the thumbs-up. They took it right in the window.


That's really what happened those guys in the window went bad people. They would just an easy target Throw That Rock but this I go back this point is about what the majority thinks because like take sporting occasions. I mean, this is why this is why all of us will certainly meet has his horrible feeling that what is happening at the moment is an end of Empire moment is because of the combination of things that is washing across us, you know, right and and the just look through Roman history and the fall of the Republic which takes 400 years from Nero to the fall but there's plague after plague that comes through the land ends out just taking taking out people making people fearful destroying the Republic in in another way, but take if you use this analogy on now, what is so Fascinating about and terrible about the combination of covid and the BLM thing is I would bet that for instance teams all taking the knee would not happen if the stadiums had people in them.


I don't know about 95. I don't want to speak about American football because I really would be on the least knowledgeable. Terrain. I could possibly find myself in but if The Terraces in the UK in the socket Terraces, the football Terraces were filled with fans. The fans would not still be staying silent as the team's all took the myth. There was a cricket match the other day between England and Ireland and the BBC because if no one in the stadium, of course says and now of course both teams are going to Phanie, as if he's I give Ancient tradition, we've always done and I mean everyone watching you just saw then every friends or says it's just so strange the way there is all sort of urban everyone there.


Now, we take the knee and the ritual if the cricket audience is a bit polite to me than football ones, but I don't think that the cricket stadium in August's like months on from George Floyd would be just saying yeah. No sure we all approve of that The Terraces and the football would definitely not be by now. They just started to boo. And and so this is this thing of the combination of events that the team captains and others don't seem to be able to judge the public mood and the public mood. Can I just suggest it on that one for instance is this Everyone. Sorry about the death of George Floyd.


Nobody defends the Minnesota and policemen and we feel no responsibility for the killing like nobody in the football stadium had anything to do with the killing of George Floyd and and the cricket audience didn't kill George Floyd, right and they're willing for a bit to say. Well, you know, there seems to be a particular problem that does sometimes come up in American policing I wish that was able to be sorted out because that's just ugly as hell and and but I'm not responsible. I'm not changing all the Norms of my Society. I'm not introducing new weird rituals and dance routines Were Meant to go through a jumping through hoops after hoop after hoop because of something which I have no connection to a no responsibility to because this is a form of a claim of collective guilt and responsibility, which is ugly everyone every way you tried to do it.


it Agreed I agree with everything. You just said, I think it's it's it would be interesting to see how people would react in a large crowd and whether or not the crowd in America and a football stadium would go with it or whether or not they would boo. I was Tsum would assume most people would go that given today's climate because they would be scared to boo, they'd be scared to react that way. This is this is how I feel the climate is today in America. Most people don't really want their politics. Sting was sports, but when they are and it's kind of being forced down everyone's throat. They just go along with it because the consequences of going against it saying look I support black lives matter, but do we have to have it here?


Could Canada can't this just be football only football and it's happened everywhere. There are libraries that are currently having breakdowns over, you know, they're collected that British library's just announced his kind of tried to decolonize itself. I mean God knows well, that means the British museum has just announced its going to have a investigation into basically everything the university system here is is doing weird stuff like announcing an audit into any potential benefit that they got from slavery. There was a bell at the Cambridge College which was recently removed. This is like this is like the the sort of magic words that are so dangerous that if their said even when they're said critically they must be stopped.


There was a bell at a Cambridge College which was removed recently because it was found that he could it could have been rung on a plantation. If you have it, but now we're in the realm of magic. This is like something from a CS Lewis Narnia thing you is it that if you ring the bell again the slavery comes back at what? What is the thinking behind it? So the problem is institution after institution is falling for it because they are not doing the thing they could do which is as just said is we're very sorry about this thing that happened but it has nothing to do with us right and if you come along and pretend Really did then we're going to say sorry.


You're a dishonest actor and I needed a the problem about all of this. Is that the most liberal and tolerant Societies in human history are now unified him being portrayed as the most oppressive and bigoted societies ever. And that's by the way a particular problem you have in America, particularly American graduates. They know so little about the rest of the world. So little about history. They honestly think the United States is the most reprehensible country on Earth. And anybody who knew anything about the rest of the world who had traveled anywhere would know what rubbish that is and yet not enough people say it because they're being held hostage by dishonest hostage-takers, but you've managed to express yourself honestly, but not without consequence in this one of the things that I want to talk to you about because I think you are a very reasonable person with some well Beliefs your thoughts are thought out you've taken these ideas and it's not like you're flippantly expressing them.


These are things that you've you've worked over in your mind for quite a long time and written them down to express them. But I've seen horrible things written about you that don't make any sense at all. And what has that been like for you to see people happy because you're not willing to go along with this Collective group thing to have these people have this completely disingenuous. - description of you. There's this interpretation of what you're trying to accomplish and and the fact that you're not willing to bend the knee your you are you're being demonized in a very uncomfortable way the truth is I don't feel it Joe. That's a man. I really I really just don't feel it.


I mean I am I don't know why that might be the case. I can I can suggest some reasons one is I don't care what people I don't care about think I you know, I really I don't mind if some bots on Twitter is mean about me it doesn't bother me the New York Times has never taken a love. Feeling towards me but I don't mind. I don't need the New York Times to love me. I don't I don't need any of that and I don't care. I genuinely don't care my own opinion is enough for me and I get to my opinions because I think about them.


I investigate them. I travel all the time when we were still allowed to travel and speak to people and meet people all around the world all the time. I'm fascinated by other cultures and fascinated by what we can learn from. Each other and I genuinely am not infant influenced At All by dishonest people who make this on his claims about me and I have to say I I've just had the good fortune in my life as a writer to always say what I think and sure that means I make mistakes that times doubtless everybody does but I can't tell I can't tell you know and particular listeners who are wondering about this. It is so much better in your life to tell the truth.


However, you see it. It is so much better to just say what you see than to shut up, you know, if of all the regrets we could all have on our Death Beds, I reckon one of the biggest is the regret that you just sidled through life kind of hoping people didn't notice you and just you just got buying you did everything you told to do and you just were a good boy and then you cite off. Hmm. I think that's a regretful position to be in I so I've always I've always said what I thought I've always written what I thought I'm amazed. I'm still here in some ways, but it's you know, I have the I only desire the approval of a relatively small number of people who I respect.


And if they said to me, I think you're totally wrong on this Douglas and I listened. But when it's people who don't want me to do me to do well for instance then of course, they don't listen to them and I think that's the same as it is in all of our Lives, you know this I mean, you know, if your wife says to you, you know, you're really onto the wrong thing here then, you know, then you listen because you know, she wants you to do well if some guy in the street with an I hate Joe Rogan t-shirt on tells you what you should do. Obviously, you're not going to listen to them. They don't want you to do well and it's it's It's one of the tools we all have to do to hone in our lives. I suppose to work out who wants us to do.


Well who wishes us well and to listen to them, even if they're critical of us and they will be at times and to separate out those people for people who just cause they don't want you to do. Well no hate you hate everything about you and whatever but but I'm just, you know II don't have much Sympathy for the people who bang on about being, you know canceled. I mean I do and it's people who have You know ordinary jobs and they've just been horribly treated by The Madness of this era. I have every sympathy for them and a lot of the cases I write about a man as of crowds tries to highlight that but I don't have much sympathy with public figures who say I can't say what I think and I can't speak up and all this sort of thing.


Can I just think if you're not going to now when are you going to if you're not going to in this life what life you expecting to come where you'll do it. And so I know I am I'm I'm comfortable as comfortable as you can be in the end times obviously as everything's burning down and there's plagues of locusts coming our way. I'm you know, I know I just honestly urge other people to do the same. I it's it's I can't say it's Dandy but it's it's a pretty good life. I mean, I, you know, I know and I have the satisfaction of knowing that I'm not And and for young people watching a particular this is just one of the most important things because as I say somewhere in man's of crowd the problem with being told the problem with going along with being told to bend the knee raise the fist jump through the hoop is that it demoralizes you and it makes you a smaller person inside you you will be demoralized.


It's because you'll know that you shouldn't have done that and it's some level you will think badly of yourself for having done it. You'll feel regretful. You'll feel cowardly and it will affect your life in other ways. And the opposite is also true the person who doesn't stand with the mob the person who doesn't go along with a mob the person who refuses to walk with the crowd will feel quietly but significantly better about themselves and I think will be a better person and they will Achieve more in their lives whatever that is because they will have self-respect and that's what these that's what to tell Italian movements across history always knew was that you grind people down and make them agree to lies because you will then be able to make him do anything now.


There's this if I say, this is very very telling thing that happened in the Communist era in Eastern Europe a vassal of Harville. Great late check leader says this when he was the one the great check dissidents and playwrights of the period in the sixties and seventies. He wrote a Peace once which is really worth reading again today where he cites the example of a green Grocer in Prague who has to put up in his window, like everyone else the notice that says workers of the World Unite and it sent by party headquarters to all green Grocers and you all have to hang it and that's not possible says a number of things happened from this. The first thing is that of course that the greengrocer is showing to everyone that he is a party lawyers and he wouldn't be able to operate Is a business if he doesn't do this thing, but it also hangs there every day as a sign of his subjugation.


It's a little thing but it hangs there as a sign of his subjugation and it reminds him that he's not the man. He could be now one of the one of the flip one of the results of that is that such a person ends up hating the people who make him hang the sign hates him because they have demoralized him. But hovels Point among others is you think you're doing a little thing but you're not you are diminishing your soul by doing this because you know that you could be something more than the person who just has to hang whatever party headquarters tells you to hang this week.


Well said Thank you absolutely outstanding more people need to hear this. This is what you just said is an excellent guideline of how to live a meaningful life and express yourself, honestly, and I think one of the things that we're dealing with with these Collective groups of people subjugating themselves to the masses is failure of our education system because although we teach people mathematics and history and all these different things. We don't teach them enough of the G of the car, first of all the consequences of giving into these things the also the temptation of giving him these things why they occur what what what is happening with human beings when they're when they're trying to force people to comply and that how this is a natural occurrence and so people can't see it they have to experience it and then they have to go what the fuck just happened and then they how did I get cancelled and then their life falls apart.


They have to look into it. It's a long lengthy process. Process because they haven't been given a map. They don't really understand how this plays out. And by the way, there's another thing from that so I isn't it which is it's not just knowing the map of the way out but knowing what is on the other side of the map and that's what that's what I wish more people could realize you know, I what I've written and what James Lindsay and bogosian and plant grows and others Deborah. So and others have been writing is is an attempt. I think I don't I can't speak for us collectively. Sunny's myself is an attempt to help people fast forward through this era of thought so you've been immersed in bad thinking all of these years.


You've been taught Croc Theory and you're being encouraged to weave through more of it. Your boss is sending you lists of unreadable books that tell lies and telling you to read them and one of the things I'm trying to do is to say I'm going to try to Short Circuit that like get you through. Through that now for the following reason none of this is what any of us should be spending our lives doing none of it and there is at some point a huge opportunity cost. But the fact that in this era so many people spent their time talking about Croc ideas. It's not a useful way to spend our lives to talk endlessly about gender performativity and and look at me is them and so on it's just not a useful thing to do.


It's not endlessly in. First thing to talk about whether there are hundred genders or million or whether you're genderqueer or pansexual is not interesting. It's really boring. It's really boring and the same goes for all the rest of it. Do we really want to speak about race for the rest of our lives know we'd like to have the least racist society that is possible to have but we don't want to speak about race or like what I don't speak about black writers. I want to talk about writers. Yeah. I don't have to about black think as I wanted to talk about thinkers, and and the The risk is that we're going to all spend our lives in meshed in this crock stuff and my hope is that if this works what a few of us are trying to do is short-circuiting that gets through this fast fast forward through that and helping people to realize what this is.


On the other side of it everyone will be able to have more the life. They should have been having. They will be dedicating themselves to the things they're good at they will be thinking about the things they wanted to think about. They won't be thinking about it. What is exactly the composition racially of the group. I am listening to but who's the best group out there? And and that's what we could all be doing, you know a friend of mine spoke at a university in America when you could still speak in public and and and and and said to me afterwards every single one of He's a businessman today every single one of the questions was about, you know, identity stuff and he said he just turned to them.


He said why are you doing this? He said your generation should be working out how we live in underwater cities and get to but to Mars now now you might you know a particular student might not feel they have much to give in the way of helping us living underwater cities. I myself would be a terrible guide to that. But but I know that everybody has something better they could be doing Then just performing these crowd performances that were all being told to do. We could have much better music. We could have much better art much better sport much better everything much better science everything if we stopped doing what we're doing a moment fast-forwarded it through it and just use the amazing potential we have and the interconnected potential we all famously have now on the planet and use it to do what's worth doing.


Yeah. Yeah. It seems like with a lot of these subjects. We have these these people who have clung to these subjects because they give them power and these these set their grifters essentially but their sanction grifters because they're they're going after these very particular hot subjects that no one wants to disagree with so you're allowed to be a grifter and you're allowed to pretend that everything is racist or everything is sexist or there's a million genders and if you disagree with that you are disappointed. Agreeing with the current Orthodoxy you're stepping out of line and you'll be punished for that and it's very much like cult thinking. It's very much like like fundamentalist religious thinking.


Yeah. There's a lot of a lot of parallels that were seeing. Well the cult stuff in particular. I mean, I mean we all had this should be said in Roper we're dealing with a cult. Yeah, the so-called woke thing which always sounds too jokey to me at the so-called awoke thing is a cold and what you have you have people telling telling young people. To speak to their grandparents if their grandparents don't have the rest of the right views that's a cult right there right there. And by the way, I was watching the other night this documentary on the Jonestown Massacre and I was amazed to see I mean the cult parallels all over the place. I was amazed to see that one of Jim Jones is things his followers was you can't go back to the United States because it's so racist.


I thought wow like hucksters and fraudsters have been on to this little longer than I I knew they had yeah, because it's such a hot button subject. And if you say it to people they they get terrified that they actually are racist or that they're going to be accused of being racist. And so they'll comply just to avoid the sting The Sting of the accusation and they'll subjugate themselves and less as I say unless we all take the Joan Rivers approach. Yes, and we say there will be a cost to you for dishonestly saying something about me like that and I won't put up with it. If we did we took the the inspiration of Joe. Rivers we get somewhere. Well, maybe with more people being at least definitely more people are taken out of their current occupation because of covid more people have lost their jobs.


And there's a lot of people that are forced into being independent if they can become independent like truly independent and not be concerned about losing a job. They can at least Express themselves. Yeah more freely and then only be concerned with the people around them who are forced into To compliance and have to attack them people who do have jobs and can lose those jobs. If I mean, there's a lot of people that are that you're not just forced into behaving a certain way. You're forced into condemning other people who don't go along with it asking you to jump on board pile on to the Mob. Yeah. Well, I just read Deborah's those book. I know you spoke to her recently and I mean, isn't it just a big amazing?


She had to basically step out of Academia. To tell the truth about sex and gender. Yes, and that's not a good sign. That's not a good sign. But thank God she's done it and thank God she and others small number of people are doing the same thing. And that's it. It's just if it's terrific and more people could take inspiration for if they could say actually Deborah so is a very good example that she could have spent her life lying and hanging around and doing peer reviewed papers making the same bullshit claims that all of her contemporaries are making wild whispering in the Team that it was all bullshit. Right, but that would be that would be a horrible life and instead she's written a really good book and out the she'll do many more great things.


Well for does he have to live in the truth? Yes, unfortunately for her there are these Avenues there is there's these places that she can go where she can go on podcasts. She could use social media, but she's gets attacked left and right because of it and I got attacked because of having her on but what she saying there's clearly Something going on when you have is a gigantic uptick of young girls who have sudden onset gender dysphoria and returning trans and then the same with Abigail Shearer her book as well. She describes the same situation and I've had people reach out to me. Hey, my daughter is going to school and her friends are turning trans.


There's a group of ten of them that have decided they're trans the odds of that being a that they're actually trans is so Staggering in my life. I get them through psychological phenomena going on. But if you bring that up people are thinking at it discredits actual trans people know we're talking about a human beings are malleable. This is something we all know. There's a reason why Cults exist in the first place human beings are very subject to manipulation to to to suggest the suggestion and also the praise that these young girls are getting for stepping out and saying that they're trans People are saying that's amazing and we're a grave.


Yes. We are interesting. We all lean towards love you get that and it seems like that's all the sudden given them meaning and giving them purpose and all I found the thing I was so awkward and lost and confused. But it was just because I was trans. I know I know I have the same thing Joe. I you know, I take Trans on last because it's the saw the most minority thing, but it's obviously very very interesting and important thing. It's a question. Yes, what's going on here and like you know, and I'm not like I say, I think something is obviously going on with the Trans thing. I think that it's wildly under discussed and I think that our societies are doing things that we will look back on with shame in terms of experimenting on young children.


I mean, we will just ask that you know, I think that most Pleasant and there's a bunch of lawsuits coming everyone's way quite soon and maybe that'll stop it. But I have like you I have parents who when we say again, we still had events would come up to me afterwards. I get emails from parents. You know, I mean, I just I have I have a sympathy which I think everybody else has but they don't voice enough because they worry about it. I have so much sympathy with parents who say I've been threatened with the suicide of my child like and by the doctors by the medical profession, you know, and when and this is what's always said when people say do you want Living daughter or a dead son and they're told that bass by medical experts.


What are they meant to say what they meant to do at least people find no sympathy for them anywhere, right? And and I think that it's I think it's a huge one eye and I think I think again it's a total look the silent majority one. Everybody knows most parents know something's going on in this is also by the way to have the real discussion about it is much more interesting than the fake one. Because the real discussion as I say about things like Auto going to philia about sexual eroticism and trans dressing and all this stuff is really interesting. Yes, and it's not like there's not much written about it. But it as you know, but I mean, it's really really in twisting much more interesting than what the trans activists tried to say about trans.


But all of that's going on all of it is trying to be suppressed. It can't be suppressed. It won't be suppressed. It will all be had out sometime and I think we can have it out now, but by the Isn't it worrying that it is the debate that it has become and I just I worry that it was Camille Paglia who first alerted me to this. I worry about the dominance that trans is taken precisely where we started off because it's an end of Empire discussion. Yeah, you know this Paglia says at the end of every Empire they get interested in sexual fluidity hermaphroditism and so on and but I do think that if this is the end of American dominance in the world and it could be if America falls into Civil War then this is the end of American dominance.


It's the end of the West as we saw it and the rise obviously in the overtaking by China and will China first of all, and and if his if that happens and historians look back on this one of the things that they will say is wasn't it strange that in the last decades this American society got Lee hung up on the issue of trans It will be seen to be a late Empire a bad sign a bad sign of things falling apart on top of the multitude of other bad signs that you particular in America have all around you at the moment that is fascinating that the end of Empires.


They get really concerned with gender and hermaphrodites and those things like that. That's Universal. Well, it certainly happens in the Greek and Roman Empires wonder why that is. I think it must be something to do with those boundaries and all other boundaries starting to erode. I mean the nature of society is that we have certain fixed ideas that we agree on. I mean what by the way isn't it trans is a brilliant one because the whole non-binary thing is a brilliant one if you wanted to pull apart Society because again get people to pretend that men and women don't exist get get people to pretend that the one of the things that we've all known from the beginning.


Doesn't exist. Yeah, and you can do all of the other stuff too. So brilliant want is a brilliant one to demoralize people on say there's no difference between men and women. The penis is a social construct. Somebody a Labour MP said recently and on television. She actually had the gall September. She said children are born without sex like penises and vaginas are so 20th century and you know, if you if you do that stuff. Tough then of course people end up. They just doubt everything everything and that's why these things worried some of us because if everybody is persuaded to doubt what they see with their eyes, then they can be persuaded to fall for absolutely anything next agreed but I don't think people are doing that on purpose with a specific goal of eroding Society, right?


So, what is this summer some are you believe in what way definitely You can predict with 100% certainty that people who will use the latest craziest trans claim and run with it. There are there are definitely politicians in all of our countries who pardon the image but use trans people as a battering ram for something else, but they use trans as a battering ram against capitalism horrible image, but I mean like they lick their just running at the door of capitalism using the latest thing that they think will be useful because they think that it demonstrates our Herbal nurses our society and obviously communist regimes were much better with trans, but it's something like that.


But so yeah, some people are pushing it but I agree it's not knowingly done among everybody right think those people are using it but it already exists. The question is why does it exist in such prevalence in the people that are supporting it in such Pro and it's another thing that demands compliance remember there was a conversation that I had with someone online back when I used to talk to people online when I used to actually engage People on Twitter this woman was saying this you brought this up in your book actually was about this is how I got brought into the whole trans thing in the first place. I pride myself on being open-minded. I literally don't care what your gender is.


I don't care what your sexual orientation is. I don't care where your ancestors are from. I just I like people I like all kinds of people and I didn't have a lot of experience to trans people, but I didn't have any problem with them zero until Till I found out that there was a woman who was a man for 30 years and then started entering into mixed martial arts competitions as a women without telling the women that she was a man for 30 years and I was furious and I like this is fucking crazy. This isn't you just entered into my realm? Okay. It's this is my world. I'm a martial arts expert and I'm telling you right now that's fucking insane and the blowback I got I didn't expect I didn't see coming and some of it was so Preposterous one of them was this When I interacted with who said she has always been a woman and I said, even when she had sex with a woman and got her pregnant and had a baby and she said yes, even then.


I remember seeing that seeing the yes, even then and going. Oh, we're in a fucking not we're in Narnia. We're nonsense language, right? We've crossed over to the other side where you could just say anything you can say a man who sticks his penis in a woman ejaculates inside of her gets her pregnant has the baby was never a man. What the fuck is going on then when what are we doing who is and and then you can also say that she is not just a woman but she's Two women in terms of physical strength all the different all the different physical attributes that we know reaction time one tenth of a second faster. There's all these different things that make the shape of the hips the shape of the shoulders the size of the hands the mind that is grown with testosterone for 30 years.


If you had a woman that was competing in any sport forget about Combat Sports, but any sport and it was found out that her parents were injecting her with testosterone from the time. She was a baby and just making her the perfect killing machine so that when she entered into the Octagon she would have this spectacular advantage over women and all they were going to do is just cut off her testosterone about two years before she entered into competition. You would go that's fucking crazy. That's cheating. Oh my God, how could you do that? That's so that's so unethical but yet when it's a trans person was always she was always a woman and we're supposed to step back and just let it all happen and the I found it repulsive.


Yeah, it was the same thing happened to you as happened to various scientists is this is exactly same thing. They trod on your realm that they tried on one of the things you knew about. And you said no and it's the same with quite a lot of scientists with that. It's just the it's a trod on their realm and they said sorry I can't do this and that's exactly what everybody should do and it Triggers on their realm. And by the way that happens on all of these issues it, you know, there are people I know who get concerned of each of these issues because it treads on the things they Know about and and that's perfectly normal and it should happen more. I mean, I'm surprised that there isn't more objection when you know because again, all of this is so much more interesting to have out.


Honestly the trans the transporting thing is so much more interesting if you have it out honestly then if you pretend as so many people want to it is much more interesting. Yes, not the actual thing is absolutely fascinating and I'm a hundred percent in acceptance of it. I'm Don't believe they're pretending to want to be women. I don't believe they're pretending to be a even the ones who don't want to be women, but the men who are sexually aroused by putting on women's clothes and women's shoes. It's fascinating I did. Yeah, I don't think they're pretending that that arouses them that 100% is a real thing. So the question is why and what's going on.


That's the real. Those are the real questions. But when you wrap this up with identity politics and you wrap this up with this Force compliance, Now the sudden we could never get to the answer and then you can say things like there is no such thing as biological sex and you go what the fuck you talking about? It's exactly the same with the relations between the Sexes questions. It's so much more interesting to have the the discussion. We would not have it. Yes than it is to have the nonsense what like, you know, as you know, I have this obsession with Christine Lagarde the form head the IMF because she always says she did it again recently. She said, you know says that if When Brothers had been Layman sisters, then we might not have had the financial crisis and and I'm just I just think I always ask but why but why why that's true.


That would be really interesting to know. Yes, and and and I ventriloquist her but her answer would be because women are exactly the same as men and also magically better in certain ways. And and I don't think as a sustainable position not just magically better but not allowed. to achieve their incredible Heights of success exactly would be if not here patriarchy there's some practice superhero not so successful and and she finally Lagana did it recently as well when she said that female world leaders have been more successful and male world leaders in tackling covid and then just left it there dangling but it's much more interesting to say to have the discussion that nobody then has which is to say if that was the case and I don't think it is particular, but if that was the case, why might that be The case that that something in the female mind makes them better at dealing with panda, right?


It's terribly putting our chart and putting a one under the female side and a zero on the male side. Let's find out what they did and apply to everybody. If it is true. Then we better get women to the top for the pandemic era fast. Yes, and we shouldn't have that as a secret. It shouldn't be like a little tits every bit of knowledge. It should be fast track but family than women in the pandemic. But we're also pretending that women are all the same. That's what's ridiculous. If that is the case it did and by the way, there's a small handful of women that are running countries. So you're not dealing with a lot of people. So what it is about those women and why are we pretending?


Why would anybody pretend those women are equal in exactly the same as every woman who's ever existed that's nonsense. We all know this time sense and this idea and you could identify with a particular gender and that would make you automatically Better at handling covid is so fucking stupid that it's just amazing that someone can just say that someone whose opinion is supposed to be respected can just imagine if a man said that magic the man said well mannered we're just better at it. Men are just all all men are better at this. Yeah. Well, of course and it is no it's no longer a hypothetical thing. It's as you know in the state you just fled in California.


This bill is just just been passed but isn't going to force all corporations to I can't one of the figure it's something like if you have five directors, you got to have a minimum of two female directors by the end of next year and the people with who they say are underrepresented bodies. You've got to have to if you've got a board of nine and then I think add up to 3 to 4 by 2022. So all of this stuff is going to be enforced crazy if by this Dave's on every single company operating in the state of California and and you know, you do just you at some point have to be able to have the discussion.


You have to have the discussion. Anyway, whether you're allowed to or not about whether for instance the underrepresented groups that are going to have to go on board including women people who are trans. I think Pacific Islanders was one LGBT obviously like what you've got to at some point. Tell everyone if you're going to make everyone go through this incredibly painful and potentially financially unhelpful process. You've got to at some point tell exactly what the benefit is. And again like Christine Lagarde with cut the California is stuck in this situation where they have to symbol taneous Lee pretend as I say in the women chapter that that that every group is simultaneously exactly equal in their competencies.


And also underrepresented people bring something that's better. And I don't I think you can hold one of those but you can't hold both or these you can't hold both without serious cognitive dissonance. Because at some point you mean by the way, I had a friend who's a mathematician to run the figures of this in the state of California and of the number of companies and I think I'm right in saying that if you're trans or Pacific Islander in California, you better clear your diary for the next few years because you are going to have to - from board meeting to board meeting.


It's gonna be it's gonna be wall-to-wall your diary your diary for 2022. Blocked and and it's not going to work. But if it's not going to work why not have why not work that out now and have the discussion now instead of having it after the endless painful gear cogs of not meshed for several years and then California on top of everything else has failed company after failed company because they prioritize the wrong things. Well, it's the presumption that the only Reason why women aren't in these positions because they've been suppressed. It's not because they're not interested in those positions at all.


And that's not where they like Lika because I've always used the term the the example of mixed martial arts Fighters. There are women who fight in a cage, but there's not a lot of them. If you look at the general population, there's not a lot of there's a spectrum of female behavior and and women that are interested in different things. I feel like that's across the board with everything that's dominated by men. I don't think It's necessarily because the men are suppressing the women although in some cases. I'm sure that's the case, but I think it's more often that women do not gravitate towards those fields. And this is always been the issue with with gender pay Gap and that's been weaponized by so many people disingenuously including Obama.


Remember when Obama was giving a speech he was talking about having to deal with the gender pay Gap and I was like cries cries. You must know. You must know you went to fucking Harvard. You have to know that that's not why there's a gender pay Pay Gap it's because they choose different career paths. I'm sure there is sexism. I'm sure some women are suppressed from certain positions. I'm sure but I'm also sure that there's a lot of women that aren't interested in these male-dominated fields because they don't appeal to them because they can make their own decisions what they want to do with their life and if all of a sudden those those things that they are not interested in become open, they just go to it because well I can get an easy job as a CEO fuck it might as well just absolutely it's great.


Wait, and by the way, isn't it sad because there will be lots of girls who will be growing up. They'll be smart and they'll be looking to do things in their lives and they'll hear Obama or anyone else in charge saying this and they will honestly think that if they go into a job and I've had this conversation with lots of people since man has workers came out they will honestly think that if they go into a job in their 20s, they will be paid less than their male colleagues. Yes, and and that's just as this a horrible way to start your life is the same way of you know, if you if you tell people lies about their society and sometimes it seemed they seem at the phone quite small things like gender pay Gap while you go on about the gender pay Gap, but because down the line you get a generation of very disgruntled people.


Have a false understanding of pay in their society. Yes, and then further down the line and I IV I mean like the transparency issue. I've had I've had a lot of contact from women since the book came out about the chapter on women is saying you say something there which is very painful but is correct, which is where I highlight the issue of motherhood and everybody knows it. It's the that feminism skipped motherhood. It didn't really know what to do with it. So went on to things it's saw as being easier easier questions and and we all know elaborate on that for people who just want to see this.


Like the the second wave feminists knew that motherhood was a big question and that of all of the things that made women different. This was possibly the most important. But they didn't know what to do with it because it is undoubtedly if you if you're talking about career and motherhood the desire to have children and the desire to have a the career that you can have. These are obviously things that at some point are going to come into contest now, you can set up your Society better in order to help women who have that but it's it's never optimal because as we know small companies, how do you support a woman and you've got a staff of three?


The woman goes away on pregnancy leaving you've got to still support and so only these aren't in it. These aren't impossible to solve for the very tricky and lots of ways and on a personal level of thing. That's tricky is how you deal unless you're very very rich with the conundrum of working every hour of the day in order to get to the top in a particular line of work and also being able to look after children and being able to Mother children and and indeed Being pregnant. I mean it's the point is it was it was always there as a very very tricky issue which it continues to be it continues to be but the third and fourth wave feminists knew it was a tricky issue and so they just skipped it and they went on to these other things like I mean by the way, not all crazy things.


I mean a lot of it domestic violence and much more is a stress as well were very worthwhile. I don't think it was particularly worthwhile when the fourth wave feminists decided to say things like all men are trash. I don't think that massively That cause well that is also the hashtag be discussed in your book kill all men kill all men. They didn't get a lot of new recruits from that one. But but but well there was also the thing that the head of fox was Ezra Klein was defending that's not really what they meant. Like what that's right. Fuck are you saying? Yes, some words mean things they don't and others don't mean what they say and it depends on my my personal choice right is what Ezra Klein was saying depends on but ideology but the point is is that again, I mean the whole issue of work motherhood the difficulty of it is not irreconcilable.


It is a very big question that and it's painful for women as it is for men and it's much more useful for our society to have that discussion and be better at sorting that out than it is to pretend that it's a problem which is either not there or solved and you know it again, is an opportunity cost to having these things out wrongly and the one as I say at the end of it is that you end up with people who have a misunderstanding of the society there in think they think it's uniquely unhappy uniquely unpleasant uniquely bigoted against them uniquely biased against them and it'll mean that they will have less chance in their lives of fulfilling their potential because they have been told that they've been born in society where their second class from the outset and I don't think that's true and I I don't think it helps young women anymore that helps young men, but it's an example of again of just this this problem with that.


There were really interesting problems. We could be trying to solve and instead, you know, our hero decides to settle down on unsolvable problems or non-existent ones. It is fascinating that women have been plugged into this Society this Society of capitalism and expected to gain equal ground while We giving birth and raising human beings that came out of their body. I had this bit that was when I was one of the times when I was being cancelled was taken out of context and put in print because it's an easy one to do those talking about how my own mother was saying.


I want a woman to be president because I think it would be great if a woman of a woman did the most important job in the world and I said, you make all the people against Zach it's not the most important job you every person that's ever lived came out of a woman's body. You literally make life inside There's 7 billion people in the world. All of them came out of a woman's body. I could you make food with your tits. You do the most magical thing ever you make baby food and literally affects the child's immune system. It makes it changes the child's intelligence you make life in your body.


You want to be president to you fucking greedy bitch and the house that was the joke and that's and that's where people got upset. I go what else you want? You want a bigger dick. You want all the money you want everything it was clearly a joke, but when he was taken out of context, you know that you want you want to be president to women who want to be president fucking greedy bitches. Wow, that's okay. That's not what I said. This but this is one of the things that's done it but it in but it all in no joking joking aside. They do the most magical thing.


We know of yeah, they literally responsible for all the life and people that don't think that's a big deal. Do you do not love people. I fucking love people. I think they're amazing all my favorite people are people. Okay all my favorite people in my life came out of a woman's body. They women do the most important thing we know of and we also so expect them to earn the same amount of money. We also expect them to be CEOs and presidents and all these other things and we don't take into account that there the we've plugged women into this capitalist Society just like we plugged us into this capitalist Society, but we have demeaned or diminished the the biological fact that the biological impact of actually creating human beings.


Yes. That's what that's what that so right eye. Quote the American writer Wendell Berry on this. He said somewhere covered decades ago that he was here that he was growing to resent their portrayal of motherhood as mere drudgery and and as something that women spend their lives on which where they could be doing something better and you know, I identify in my describes their these cases like The Economist magazine a couple years ago around a piece describing like the child debt. What it costs you to have a child and how it's sort of therefore not worth your while because it'll you won't get to this level in promotion that you know, do you know who it was it was being talked about as if the point of life is to get to the Grave with the largest possible bank balance exactly and perhaps and you know, Wendell Berry says and I love this.


He says we all have to spend our lives on something we have to spend ourselves on something. And of all of the things you could spend yourself on in your life, the raising of a child would seem to be absolutely at the top much higher than if you've attended the thing at the top was dying with the largest bank balance and and and so it's not that it has to be either or but it is incredibly sad when a society yes presents it as if one of the greatest things you can ever do is me a drunkard. And by comparison, you know getting to the top of some bloody investment firm where you're going to find there all woke idiots.


Anyway, once you're there and you're wasted your time, and then you got a time and party and you're out and that that wasn't that wasn't all it was cracked up to be after all, you know, every everybody has to with my late friend Christopher Hitchens once said everybody has to choose their regrets. You know hmm. There's there's a regret that worth choosing or not and if whatever you choose knowing honestly what you're going into would be a good thing and I would say I completely agree with that and I'd also say there are women that don't ever want children and that's fine too. There's women that want to travel the world and they want to do art or they want to be CEOs of companies or they want to be fighter jet Pilots, whatever the fuck they want to do.


That's fine. That's wonderful. Salute to diminish the idea of Womanhood to the point where you're diminishing this incredible this incredible thing that human beings are capable of doing and only females making human beings. They make them inside their body. It's one of the most spectacular things that we know of if someone could do if there was an invention that could do that. It would be phenomenal if someone had a box and babies came out of it and then the those babies went on to be presidents and and football players and and mathematicians you'd be like, this is the most incredible thing ever through this box inventors have been born.


Well, it's human beings but our society for whatever reason has diminished that role because it doesn't add up on a ledger it you you don't see it. You don't see it in the bank account. You know, it's it's just having a baby it hit his ass. By the way, because I'm always after answers to these things. And I think that the suggestion that we could try to get agreement on across all political boundaries such as they now exist is that I think you get an absolute majority in all of our in all the developed countries for the following proposition, which is that nobody should be held back from achieving whatever they can achieve in their life by dint of a characteristic over which they have no say, yes.


And and I think I mean it maybe people aren't honest upholsters. I think they pretty much I think I think it's a very small number of people now in America or Britain who think that a woman who's able to do the job shouldn't get the job because she's a woman riding a very small number of people think that you know, those are so a gay shouldn't achieve things because we're gay if we can if we can do them and I think a very small number of people they exist but I think there's definitely a vast minority. I think most people think that you shouldn't be held back from whatever you can achieve because of the color of your skin. I think I think we have almost total agreement on this. Yeah societies and I resent by the way, the those people on the far left to pretend that actually everybody on the right doesn't agree to that because it's absolute agreement on that.


The what there is a disagreement about is a perfectly serious issue to disagree on which is how you go about making sure that those optimal conditions not only are attained but remain in place. Yes. Yes, and the left has an answer which is forcing people onto boards and 44 to tell you and and quotas and much more and that has something to be said for it and the right has its own answer which is broadly speaking give it time and it'll all look a bit more, you know, it'll get there and that's got a lot to be said for it and something to be said, you know against maybe but broadly speaking.


That's the deal by now and it's not such a bad disagreement to have and if we had it out honestly and if we had it sincerely we could again we could we could get there we could we could solve that. Well, we'd like everything to be a meritocracy. But in order to do that, you would really have to somehow or another even out the starting points writing. This is a gigantic problem in America with impoverished cultures or impoverished communities that have been there since slavery and there's nothing very little been done to try to improve upon those things. So when you talk about issues of race that that's a primary factor in whether or not this is a meritocracy.


How can it be if some people start, you know at third base and other people are starting, you know several miles from from the beginning. Yeah. Yeah, of course. Yes. Yes is but this is also an issue when you force people into these positions or when you make it so difficult. For people to have a workplace environment that is friendly and loose and easy. There's going to be people that don't hire women because they're worried that women are going to complain about sexism or that women are going to be difficult to work with. This is very very unfortunate very unfortunate aspect of the complaining and of this sort of framing all of these businesses as being sexist and the fact that these women aren't in these Missions of power is because of some patriarchy that's holding them back.


You're going to have a lot of people that are scared of hiring these women because they don't want to be accused of sexual harassment or discrimination and you could actually fuck up the whole process. If you could yes, you could also I mean they already stats on that a CEOs who just won't fly in the same cabin of a ever playing as female colleagues will not even be on the same Hotel floor as female colleagues other This trip and I did this the thousands of Staggering. The fear is being injected with weaponized is weaponize and the problem is and this is the problem on all of these identity traits thing and the way we've decided to weaponize them. The problem is is that it relies on everybody on Earth being honest all the time.


It relies on everybody being an honest actor on for instance if you get if you get the right character trait person in place, they will always use their position accurately and they will always level accusations truthfully and it's possible and I just put it out there human nature being what it is that some people when they're found to have a cudgel that they can use might use it in order to advance themselves might use it to do over somebody they don't like or to get a little bit further forward and that That happened throughout history. It happens in every society the problem exists if other people cannot ever identify that yes, and that's dangerous because it means that everybody is so that thing I'm trying to help diffuse.


Everything's bubbling away underneath and nothing is allowed to happen above the surface. Everybody knows what we you know, I say about the Sexes everyone knew a load of things till yesterday, and we've had to pretend not to know them today. And that's the case in each of these situations. I'm a big fan of Steven pinker's and one of the things that I enjoy about Steven pinker's work is watching people get angry at him saying how things are better today than they've ever been before and I think that's really inarguably true. It's pretty clear. When you look at the statistics of violence of rape of murder of a theft of all the variables that we would consider to be important in a polite Society there.


Less of all those things today than there have been in the past. There's less homophobia. There's less racism is less all those things. My fear is that we're going through this really fucked up time and it will get better but it will take so much time that I'll be an old man's before I see it and that all these years will be spent just knee-deep in nonsense and as the only with all this horseshit until it's the generation eventually work it out. It's possible. Look. I mean there have been lots of people have predicted this but the problem What you get when you get a society of the free kind of Freedom that we have taken America is that the end at the end of this process people are bored and they want something to do and they react against Freedom out of something like habit.


They're so used to reacting to things against things that they react against the best thing going and they don't realize it there is something like that that's going on in America. There is a way back and it has to involve as I said before some historical. text it has to involve people knowing about things that happened before yesterday has to involve people knowing about things that have happened and are happening now around the world because if you have if you have it in context, you cannot possibly think that the system you've got going in America is so unfair that it deserves to have a 1789 or 1917 moment and maybe what will happen is that people will start to see the stakes will realize They were interested in the performative bit of Revolution, but they don't actually want to burn down the whole damn building and you just have to hope those people are going to be in large enough numbers to see off the people who see a great big bloody pyrotechnic disaster and just want to rush towards it.


Well, I'm very thankful that there's people like you that are out there that are writing books that highlight all these issues that we're dealing with and that you are brave enough to go forward with your thoughts on uncensored despite the criticism and the way you present them you're so articulate and you're so dead on the money with so many of these issues. I think you're one of the bright lights that could lead us out of this darkness, and I think your work is very brave in that regard because I know the kind of blowback. I've read the kind of blowback that you've received. I think it's very important what you're doing. That's very kind likewise Joe and it's just a great pleasure to virtually see you. I hope we can have a drink some In the great state of Texas.


Yes. I hope it's legal someday what I mean. I'm not going to be the first person to take the vaccine, but I'm sure something's coming. Well after I we've got that let's have a scotch. Yes. Let's do it. So The Madness of crowds the the newest latest edition with this new addition that you add 2 to it. Yeah is new chapter brings us slap up to date and he's out this month. It's out this month and I can't recommend it. Now if it's excellent, and the audio book is excellent, too and you read it. Oh, I love doing that but and I particularly enjoyed it because there are strange things. I get to read out like some of the work of Nicki Minaj and I love I love doing that and a lot of my listeners were very startled.


I'm sure they were I'm sure they will well, thank you Douglas. Hopefully next time. I see you being person. Absolutely. It's been great to be with you Joe. Great. Thank you guys very well here. Bye. Thank you friends for tuning into the show, and thank you too master class. I highly recommend you check out master class and you can get unlimited access to every master class. And as a JRE listener, you can get 15% off an annual membership. Go to master. Class.com Rogan. That's masterclass.com Rogan for 15% off master class. We're also brought to you by for Sig mattock, and they're fantastic mushroom coffee with lion's mane and chaga.


It's great for You it doesn't even make sense. How is coffee good for you. It is good for your brain good for your immune system half the caffeine of regular coffee and a hundred percent money back guarantee. Love every sip or get that money back and I'm gonna hook you up just for Jerry listeners. You can receive up to 39 percent off on their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim this deal. You must go to four Sig Matic.com Rogan. This offer is only for JRE listeners, and it's not available on the The website go to fo you are SI G. M-- atic.com Rogan go there and get yourself some delicious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out.


We're also brought to you by Groove life in their awesome silicone ring that I wear every day. And now the groove belt check out the groove belt and the groove rings at Groove life.com and use the code Rogan for 10% off your first order and we're also Brought to you by Buffalo Trace the only bourbon with balls the buffalo on the label has a pair kids. It's an awesome company that's been around even before America distilled aged and bottled by Buffalo Trace Distillery 90-proof Franklin County, Kentucky. Buffalo Trace American family owned and independent much. Love to you all. Thank you for tuning in, bye-bye.