
Hello friends. Welcome to the show. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by woop. Woop is a fantastic fitness tracker that I wear 24 seven. That gives you personalized incite into your body's recovery Straine and sleep with actionable feedback. In real time, it measures your heart rate and heart rate variability, your resting heart rate. It takes all this data and, and a mountain of data that it gets from 24 hours of your day. And then it puts it through its algorithm and you get all sorts of actionable information. You get a find out how much stress your body should take on for working out and how strenuous your day has been. You can know how much sleep you should get and how well you slept.


The insight that woop gives you his next level and its the best fitness tracker than I've ever used. It can let you know how behavior's like taking CBD drinking caffeine or certain diets impact your sleep and recovery in a way that's personalized to you so that you can understand how to better optimize your behaviors. So for anybody looking to build healthier, smarter habits, woop is a no brainer for my listeners. You are not mine, but you know, listeners are listening right here. Whoop is offering 15% off for JRE listeners with the code Rogan at checkout. So go to woop that's w H O and enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15%, get to know yourself on a deeper level.


Unlock yourself with whoop. We're also brought to you by butcher box. Butcher box makes an easy to get high quality humanely raised, meet that you can trust the deliver. 100% grass fed grass finished beef, free range, organic chicken, heritage breed, pork and wild caught seafood directly to your door. It's a fantastic company and it's got unbeatable value. The average cost is less than $6 a meal and there's lots of flexibility. There's all sorts of box options and delivery frequencies to fit your needs. And you can cancel at any time with no penalty. You can choose your box and delivery frequency. They offer five boxes for a curated box option's as well as the popular Kustom box so we can get exactly what you and your family love.


I love grass fed grass finished. Rib-eyes that's my favorite. And that's what I get. Butcher box ships, your order frozen for freshness and packed in an eco-friendly 100% recyclable box. It's awesome. It's an awesome company, great ethics behind them. And they're going to hook you up. You going to give you some ground beef our life. For a limited time, new members can get two pounds of free ground beef in every butcher box order by signing up today@butcherbox.com slash Rogan, that's a butcher box.com/rogan to get it done. Ground beef for life. We are also brought to you by ZipRecruiter.


ZipRecruiter is going to help you because hiring is challenging, especially with everything else you have to consider today. But there's one place where you can go where hiring is simple and smart, a place where businesses can connect to qualified candidates. And that place is ziprecruiter.com/rogan. ZipRecruiter sends your job to over 100, have the web's leading job sites, but they don't stop their with their powerful. Let me say that again. With their powerful matching technology, ZipRecruiter scans, thousands of resumes to find people with the right experience and actively invites them to apply to your job. ZipRecruiter makes hiring a efficient and effective with features like screening questions to filter candidates and an all in one dashboard where you can review and rate your candidates.


ZipRecruiter's so effective that four to five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. And now you can try ZipRecruiter for free listeners to this podcast can go to ziprecruiter.com/rogan that's ziprecruiter.com/r O G a N ziprecruiter.com/rogan. Go there and try it for free ZipRecruiter, the smartest way to hire. And we're also brought to you by name and the popular hydration drink mix It I'm always raving about a love, it, drink it all the time. It's an awesome electrolyte drink. Fantastic for you to taste great. Well, they have also launched their newest line energy multiplier with roughly a hundred milligrams of clean caffeine.


It is the perfect coffee replacement and an all natural alternative to process energy drinks for a sustained energy boost throughout the day half of Americans report, they struggle with daily fatigue and some signs include decreased focus, lack of motivation, poor mood and unhappiness. Well with liquid IVs energy multiplier, you can upgrade your vibe and reach your constant state of awesome. I don't know what that means. I'm just reading this, but let me tell you from my personal experience, it tastes great and it does give you a nice boost and it's actually filled with natural ingredients. It contains a mixture of macho, why you saw and ginger that's high in antioxidants and it helps improve mood and focus.


And it's a healthy alternative to traditional energy drinks. There's no artificial flavors or preservatives and liquid IVs cellular transport technology. It delivers an optimal ratio of nutrients for a more efficient uptake. Enhanced rapid absorption into the bloodstream gives you a lasting energy boost fast. It's awesome. It's great for you and liquid ABI is an awesome company. They are on a mission to change the world. They are donating 3.7 million servings in response to COVID-19 and products are being donated to hospitals. First responders, food banks, veterans, and active military liquid Ivey is available. I will say that again. Liquid I V is available nationwide at Costco, or you can get 25% off when you go to liquid ivy.com and use the code.


Joe Rogan all one word at checkout. That's 25% off. Anything you order when you use the promo code Joe rogan@liquidit.com. So start fueling your adventurous today@liquidivy.com and the promo code Joe Rogan. My guest today is one of my favorite guests. I have had them on multiple times. He's an awesome human being, a fascinating and unique dude. He's an AI researcher working on autonomous vehicles, human robot interaction and machine learning at MIT and beyond. He also has his own podcast, the artificial intelligence podcasts, and just an all round fascinating human being pleased.


Give it up for my friend. Lex for you. The Joe Rogan experience. Joe Rogan block gas by night, all day. Hi Jen. Before we get started. Yeah. How bout that colder wall guy, but I just played for you. How crazy is that? He was 21 when he made that song. Is he close to 21 right now? It's 25 now. Yeah. He sounds like Johnny, like later Johnny Cash. What was your Johnny Cash's when did it hurt? Yeah. You know, so I'm like a pane, a depth of richness as a voice. So It's weird. Like how do you, how do you get that at 21? Hi, I'm going to see him at like 14.


He probably developed early. Probably want to have some s**t in his life. Oh, this guy could be some whiskey in that story somewhere. Oh yeah. Yeah. He had to go through some real s**t to have that, that voice. And that, that just the ma this, the sensibility, this, the mindset of those songs. I know that Kate McCannon song, like Jesus Christ, you have to listen to the whole song. It's crazy. It's and it's good. Yeah. One of the things I hope like with your Spotify thing is that you will be able to play songs We want to, but it's weird. It's like They, they've left open. They are trying to figure it out. Right? All of this stuff is basically, there's a lot of work in progress.


We are trying to figure My dream here at Spotify. If you're listening, my dream is as a, as a little boy is to play Stevie Ray Vaughn or Jimmy Hendrix on the Joe Rogan experience. And not, not be nervous about being like taking down or something because it, because I don't have the rights for, to cover the song or whatever. All right. I wonder how that works for the artist. Well, for someone like Stevie Ray Vaughan or Jimmy Hendrix, they were both dead. So it'd be the estate of the artist. What, which oftentimes I believe probably makes it more slippery. Yeah. Because then you're dealing with people that, you know, kind of own it as a commodity rather than the actual artist itself. But there's a difference between like the Beatles and then this D very Vonks or whoever owns thievery Von you know, its like a bad mother efforts to you, you know, they are not going to, it's not like corporate, But you never know, man.


I mean, he might've had an ex wife who sold it or who now who knows, you know? Yeah. Anyway, Spotify please make it happen. I almost had the opportunity to drive Stevie Ray Vaughan once When I was driving limos all the while. Yeah. A man, but he wouldn't take limos. He, he would always take cab. So they'd have a limo in the limo. We'd pick up on everybody else. Like all of the other band members or the other people that they would get in a limo and Steve Ray Vaughan would get into a cab because he is that mother f****r. Yeah. I just, for the first time actually. Yeah, he has. He's real. He's a real, he's a genuine human beings. I just feel the first time, listen too, like an interview with him. Like I've never heard Jimmy Hendricks really talk or Steve Rayvon talk before this interview that he was really drunk on the interview.


And that I realized that there was a, there's a man behind the music. There's a, there is some pain, there's some drinking and just, I just, I don't know, demons that he was running from. There's like a, a disconnect that you almost have to have from the normal mind to create that kind of sound. The sound like, like when you go to there's some, some Hendrick song's like voodoo a child was a great one. Right? They're the, just the sound is in that guitar, his soul he's so out there he's so wild. You know, there's like a famous a store where Eric Clapton, I first saw Steve Rayvon play and he was like, what in the f**k am I doing?


Can actually just get his Eric Clapton is seeing a, did I say Steve Rayvon to Jay Jimmy Hendrix, you met Jimmy Hendricks. I met Jimmy and you said, okay, but that is Eric Clapton went and saw Jimmy Hendrix played live and was, you know, he was such a talent that everybody else was like, what are we doing? Yeah. The cool thing is a, I mean, I dunno if you know, but they have Eric Clapton is and Jimmy Hendricks both play. I'm a fender Strat since the same guitar so that you can imagine. And then Eric Clapton is this like warm, smoother tone. I can just imagine Eric Clapton is seeing like, how the f**k did he get that sound out of that thing?


How did you pull that off? But it's still Eric Clapton has some amazing f*****g songs and amazing sound. I mean, what's the Layla that song, Layla. God damn. Is that a good song? Yeah. Both acoustic and electric. He has an acoustic verb on MTV used to do this thing unplugged. So he played like tears in heaven, which is a hard, but when he lost his son, right? Yeah. Okay. No, it's unfair off of a balcony. Yeah. It's so much pain in that song. And then there's the bad-ass songs. Well, what does the do you do do well when it came down on them? Yeah. I mean, the thing about his music versus Hendricks is it was brilliant.


I mean he, Eric Clapton is a, well, I shouldn't say was because he's still alive is a brilliant musician. Brilliant. But for the sound falls in the line, meaning it, it, it all seems brilliant in purposeful It uniform and the song's are amazing, but it falls in line. Whereas, you know, there's s**t that Hendricks would do. He was out there. It was like this, this new thing, man. It was just, he was gone and he was f*****g in his twenties.


He died. He was 27 years old, which is so crazy. As a technique wise, I know you don't play guitar, but technique wise, he just didn't fall any conventions. If it was just like, it just like thumb, he put her over the top and just like, it was messy and the way he played rhythm wasn't when you want played with him, it wasn't like, like three chords. It was three chords. But every time you played those chords, they are always different. They, they always messed with it. He always like throwing it a little chaos and there's songs like a machine gun. We know that one that I love that song. Just like, well, where did they come from? There's so many, the song's they're like, where is it? Like if six was nine, like that that's song, like what does that, what is that?


He just, its a lot of it. It is drugs, that's it? That's the truth. You know, that's the sad truth. Yes and no. I mean it's, it's sad and that he's not here anymore. Well, but it's not sad in that what he accomplished in his 27 years on this planet still to this day, haunts guitarists. Like if you ask a professional guitar, there is a, a million brilliant guitarists. I mean there's so many, you know, some people were big fans of Eddie van Halen. I mean I think to this day that Stevie Ray Vaughan version of voodoo child is it's it's, you know, you always have to give the best credit to the original, which was Jimmy But Steve Ray Vaughn's voodoo chow is f*****g amazing.


And its him it's clearly him, you know, leave this place to go with this. I mean, I'd said it a million times. That's why I named this Podcast I stole the name from Jimmy Hendricks. Yeah. The Joe Rogan Experience it came from the Jimmy Hendrix in the spirit. Yeah. Nothing, nothing like them. I just always been at odd leech attracted to him, you know, that's a weird word to use, but that's what it is like attracted to his music and a tract like him. It was something about him that just always resonated with me. You know, the old studio I have the Hendrick's mug shot up and it just, it represents the sixties know. But the, and also the psychedelic thing experience is like not, not in this like a cheesy way, but like in a really out there way, the genuine, genuine, authentic mean is the, the, the, the, the fun tension, because you you're a health guy.


You talk about like how to be healthy, how to almost like have a balance. But then at the same time you say that you celebrate the self destruction that led to the genius at Jimmy Hendrix, Something, I celebrate the self destruction. The self destruction is not an unfortunate aspect of that path. Right. And there's a lot of a weirdness to Jimmy Hendricks death. I don't know if you know, like he had a, a gangster manager who apparently had him kidnapped just so that he could rescue him and convinced Jimmy that, you know, he was a savior. There's a book that was written on it. Would that accuses this manager of killing Jimmy Hendrix and saying that they also threw his girlfriend off a roof when she did either jump off a roof, it was thrown off a roof and died shortly afterwards.


Cause she knew too much or whatever who the f**k knows it was one of A Hendrick's bodyguards or someone who worked for the manager that world, the story. But the thing about that path, the path of drugs and destruction, it's been, it's been a path of many of my idols, whether it's a Kennison or a Richard Pryor or even Hicks, you know, Hicks died from cancer. But a lot of that is probably attributable to him, chain smoking and just a lot of drugs and stuff when he was younger and just destroy his life. And, and, and it's also like a pancreatic cancer is so it's a genetic thing as well. You never really know what's causing pancreatic cancer, but Well that the, your conversation with Mike Tyson actually symbolizes this really interesting life from me because here you have like one of the greatest fighters ever, who some all found inner peace to the whole, like that marijuana, marijuana, but just the way he was behaving, just it was positivity and just, this is good vibes, putting them out there.


And yet he now for at least brief moment in his life rediscovered the darkness. Like I was, I was watching your podcast with him in the moment when you said like, you were like having another level of chat, he just took like a few levels up by saying like that, you know, when you think about hurting people. So sometimes it's sort of Jasmine, it's a gas MC and yet you try to laugh it off, but there's like memes of he's like, no, I'm serious. Yes. Well, I mean, I, I was laughing. I mean, I wasn't really trying to laugh it off. I was laughing at the, the madness of that. What does that mean to you by the way that Donald Trump retweeted a clip of that? I dunno what to make the politically, I dunno what the context of them, but you were, you treated Mike Tyson's saying it was a erotic, right?


Trump's like an old comedian who just happens to be president. And it really, I mean, in the same kind of behavior that a comedian has, the timing, like his timing when the, the thing about Hillary Clinton you'd be in jail. Remember that the timing of that when, when they were doing a debate and she, she said something about him being it's painful. To I, I went back and watched those debates, this painful to watch. It makes me as somebody who wants to see truth and positivity win out in the world. Pain's me to think about the debates between Biden and Trump that I don't think they're gonna happen. Don't think so.


No. The only thing, I think the people in the democratic part of your two Y's, I think it's possible that CommonWell Harris might debate pants. I think that's probably, and I think she'll do really well against pants. Pence is a bit robotic and careful and you know, and evangelical, you know, it's a super Christian, I think she should probably do very well. And those debates, you know, it's, especially while there's no audience, that's the thing, man. Those, the, a lot of it was like getting them zingers in. Yeah. I think Trump needs an audience, like a comedian. And you said why? I think he needs it. It was certainly how crowd to work off. Yeah.


How do you se Donald Trump jr. His girlfriend's name? Kimberly? How do you say it? I'm like Gilfoyle is that Gilfoyle and the way it's written, it was like, why are we pretending that this is list is the correct use of these letters because of this. You shouldn't put all of those letters together that like, fix that I'm but there's a great video that someone put it together and I retweeted it or re posted it of her screaming, this message to an empty room. And then there is a Beaver on the top of the mountain, you know?


Right. This is, this is the thing that happens is amazing. What's the best. Its undefeated. This thing about doing stuff in like, audience's like here it is like this because it's so good. You are, It's still just find it on my Instagram. It's all on my Instagram. But its so funny because it's people are doing stand up these days on Xoom and it's bad. Like a really good comics look terrible doing stand up to my audience.


Yeah. It's just not how comedy is supposed to be there. It's like, it's like, you know how you have a battery and your charging a battery. You, you have to put something on the area. It play in the real quick because it is so good. You can dream Is a Beaver screaming at a time.


It's so perfect. Yeah. It's so good. It's 2020 and not sure. All right. It's so perfect. That Beaver by himself on the top of that mountain, just screaming But timing. His genius Blazing. It's a man. Whoever made that. Thank you. Thank you whoever you are. But you know, there's comics that are doing standup in these zoom things and its like, you know how to charge a battery. If you have to connect it to the positive and then you have to connect the negative, you know, you have to, there's two cables that you have to connect. The two of them together. If you only connect one, it doesn't work well.


That's how it is. Was stand up. You have to have an audience. Its one of those art forms that you, you need to have a reaction. The people have to be there. You feed off of them. You, you, you create comedy with them. And in a lot of ways, one of the things that Trump does outside of these speeches and get everybody excited about things he's doing stand up. He tells jokes. He talked s**t. He gets laughs. Like they were saying like there was an interview with one of the, one of the debates you have said terrible things about women. You've called women pigs. You've called them this. Now he goes, wait, wait, wait. Only Rosie O'Donnell he says is in the audience goes crazy. In the last they are told to not respond.


They're told to not respond. The audience they're told not to laugh, but they can't help it. He just nailed it. He f*****g nailed it. And it's like a comic old comic. And it, I don't know if he's the same guy as he was back then. Just honestly, just being honest the same way I will talk about a fighter. Like his father time wins every time. No, if you listen to interviews with Donald Trump, maybe from the nineties, he M he's a different guy because he's much like sharper. I mean, listen, don't want to be here or just like your age. You just it's just reality. I mean, no one gets better when there are a hundred, it sounds like the guys is a 100 and all of a sudden he runs faster. He talks better.


He's a, he's reading more and writing more. He sees better. No we're dying. We're all dying slowly. Okay. And I don't know what kind of pressure being the president, his butt. I can only imagine it's almost unmanageable and he's managed at better than anybody I've ever seen. But the reality is it's still pressure. You still, it still father time wears on you. <inaudible> the river beets down the Rock's and smooth them out. There is no way around it. It was just, it is what it is. So whether or not he's still got that kind of timing. That's a, that's a real question. But if him in Biden get into a debate situation and he hits Biden with a couple of zingers like that, I know I don't most.


So how do you think Biden? My get out of the debates, just kind he's going to have to get out Of the debates. I mean, if there's some art, if I was a democratic strategist, there's no f*****g way I would let him debate. Like listen, we're winning because it, the only reason why people when the only reason is cause they want Trump out of office, you could have, if I, if people to judge what's in the position that Biden was in, it would be a, I mean he would a much stronger, like so many, a much stronger response from people, right? Young person speaks well, if Tulsi Gabard was in that position, did she could be president? I know that the democrats' for whatever f*****g reason you didn't want it to be.


But if she got into those, that position, when she was debating, if she was debating with Trump and people saw her and saw her record saw it, the fact that she's served overseas twice, all of the fact that have been a Congresswoman for six years saw how well she speaks, how honest she is. No, just the integrity of the character you can see in the way she carries herself. She, the, one of the big problems as the democratic nomination process happen before coronavirus, like we were in to kind of realize the economy was doing well, you know, things are going just the regular. And so you kinda, the, the boring generic candidate went out. What we need now is a great, like inspiring leader. Yeah. Not somebody who is, you know, Joe Biden's strategy currently is to just sit back and don't say anything and let Trump destroy himself.


Well, that is, to me, says something, he jumbles his words up and he f****d things up and he forgets where he is. And it's like, you know, he's had multiple brain surgeries more than that. Yeah. Oh yeah. I can play you some s**t. I mean, like it's kind of crazy. Hi, Jamie of her paid you, this one I'm going to, I'm going to send this to you, Jamie. But the look, but the guy A contrast was like, Andrew Yang. I dunno if you listen to Andrew Yang his days, but he's, Andrew's like teaming with ideas, with energy, with excitement, with a passion of different ways of the things that can do it. You know, that's what you need now is an inspiring or a leader that unites us.


You know, my bread Winestein is on his, a big as he talks about on your podcast, like uniting having basically a center left and as a center, right. Candidate just uniting the nation. Yeah. I'm sending this to you right now in Jamie. Sorry. But yeah. So The, I love 90 of the nation versus Andrew is a really interesting guy. Like a he's he's not what's the standard, you know, like what, wait, what are you, what your looking for from a guy who's running for president is one of the biggest things he's known for his, the universal basic income. He's basically saying, Hey guys, look, automation is coming and there's going to be a lot of people that have worked. And how bright does he look now that we have seen that not automation, but the pandemic took out so many of these jobs and we did need universal basic income.


It really was important. And that same sort of a situation could with a, with, with that next, I mean, from what we're dealing with now, to what we could be dealing with with another pandemic plus automation, you're going to see a lot of people that are out of work and it'd be, it went from a place of people wanting economic prosperity to, Hey, lets just make sure that people don't lose their houses. Lets make sure that people can eat. Lets make sure that people we'll have a roof over their head. And that's, that's really where we were in the middle of the pandemic. But The big thing, whether you agree on like automation universal, basic income or not, it doesn't matter. The point is besides UBI, he's a source of a giant number of ideas and he presents them in way.


Not saying Republicans are wrong and Democrats have Right but saying let's together. Figure out which of these ideas are right. He just, he basically has an idea forever. The, the purple belt did just got it. That's you have more brilliant than UBI. And now in this defense of time of policing, we have every cop get a purple belt. Yeah. At least a purple belt. Yeah. From a legit Brazilian Detroit, right. May be blue belt, second Stripe. Right. You can learn in a triangle. Yeah. Will know how to defend yourself. And then so many ridiculous videos I was watching. There's a, a, an account I follow on Instagram called the police posts. It's basically a police oriented Instagram page. You know, its like four cops like educating cops and, and talking about situations.


Then they show a lot of like situations where cops overestimate their ability to, to handle things physically and get f****d up. And one of them today, it was this guy gets rolled over and beating up and it just does know what he's doing then, you know, in that wouldn't happen. If, if you we're talking about someone that's a purple belt. It right. I dunno if this is true. But I heard in some places like New York, a rear naked Shokes are illegally all legal now, which is like, which is what, which we should expand. The Jitsu a training too. The people in government to, because it doesn't make any sense. Its one of the most safe ways to have pacifies. Right.


Well I think a lot of it had to do with the Eric Garner situation, right when that guy got. But that's the thing about the era garden situation. His, they should have never f****d with that guy and they should have never, they should have never manhandled hymn in the first place. Forget about choking him. They should have left them alone. All of the guy was doing was hanging out on the corner, selling loose cigarettes now because I have a cough button, hold on, we'll try it. That it worked better Jamey, but the other side, but the thing is that we should press it. And like in unison, yeah. Contrasts this idea that they were going after this guy for loose cigarettes, based on what happened after the George Floyd protest where people were smashing windows and stealing things at a store's and the cops were just standing there, right?


Because s**t got so crazy that they let people just loot and smash windows and steal things. Meanwhile, they killed a guy who was just selling loose cigarettes. All he was doing is standing there. He pre presented no threat was just trying to make a couple bucks selling cigarettes. And they grabbed him, threw him to the ground and we're choking them. I think that and public perception. So what's the solution to that. How do we get those cops out, those humans out, right? I think you need way better training and you need a lot of training and Jocko, Willink talked about it and he had a great position. He thinks they should be spending 20% of their time training. And this idea of defunding the cops. He goes, now you need more funding, you need more funding and more training and you need to get rid of the ones that sock and you need a really stringent process of elimination or the same way they had in the seals.


Same thing they had in the Rangers. You get rid of the people with weak character. And there's a lot of people with weak character that wound up being police officers. And those are the ones that you're seeing. But there's also a lot of people, his strong character to do an amazing job. No one cares about that. You don't get a lot of those because what we're seeing is most of the videos that go viral are almost always bad. It was one really good video from the a, the beginning of the George Floyd protest where this one cop in Flint gets together and says to these, this group of people that's protesting, we're with you. We will March with you. Like we're not in opposition. We are in this community. And, and you know, and I'm, I'm here to, I'm here to be your friend. I'm here to help out. And that's what we're here doing as police officers in, they hugged this guy and they were all hugging each other.


Then they walked together. It's beautiful. It's a beautiful, and it brings a tear to you. I that's, that's what we want. Right? We want people that are police officers that are, that have like strong character. Someone who's like an exceptional human being. I think that's what you have to be to have to have that time. God and defunding the police has not a solution to in any kind of way. I know this is what I think most people probably don't realize is a, you know, it takes an, an exceptional human being too, to be a police officer in a sense that you have to be, especially in these times, you have to be patient because basically a large percentage of the population is at best skeptical at worst hate you.


And usually now, as you know, especially now and do it during all of that, you have to still maintain comm. You have to, to establish control. You have to help people. You have to serve the community, all those things. It takes an exceptional man or a woman to do that. That, and it's depressing to think because the exceptional humans' in our society who would want to join the police force now. Well, I talked about this with Edward Snowden a recently. And one of the things that we said was that what, what really needs to be done is we need to do something at the root cause of it. What, like, why are there still these deeply impoverished communities in this country that haven't changed since the sixties and that there's been no work done to try to improve them or whatever work has been done has been ineffective.


There's still crime written. There still gang written. There is still filled with violence. I'm like, that's, that's why there's so much crime. There's much crime because there's, there's so many communities that it's just like deeply entrenched and what they are, whether it's a South side of Chicago or parts of Detroit, I mean to, if you want to lower crime, you have to increase economic opportunity. You have to increase education. You have to make people feel like their in a safer environment, you have to do something to, to make these neighborhoods better. Now I'm a moron. I'm not the person to figure that out. I don't know how you make a neighborhood better, but it's not impossible. And when you look at the amount of money that they spent on stimulus to try to help these businesses during the pandemic that we were suffering, like, why couldn't they do the exact same thing in the past to these cities?


Why couldn't they treat that like a pandemic, a pandemic or violence and crime that needs to be remedied? Yeah, this whole, the sad thing about the way the stimulus is being distributed or at least my worry is that it creates a greater gap in wealth, wealth disparity versus a lesser one. So all of the problems you were mentioning, it's only going to make them worse. So people who are not while off we are going to become worse, that's the opportunity for jobs. It's going to be lesser are the opportunities for people who are gonna lose their businesses. That means their dreams are broken essentially. And the people who worked for the people who ran the businesses are going to not have a job in all of that creates a greater disparity within those communities, a greater a desperation.


And then desperation. I've been reading the rise and fall the third Reich, a great book. I recommend to a highly, it talks about the thirties and the rise of Hitler and Germany and the pain, both economic and psychological turns into this like dark energy that can be combined with a charismatic leader to go into a direction of hatred, verses love and progress. And that's terrifying. I don't think we have a competent charismatic leader that would do that a in a positive or negative direction, but I do hope a leader arises that That uses that energy of pain that did do something good in a positive way.


And we need that. Like I think, I think people don't realize how much pain they're is being experienced right now. I like most people in real pane don't have a podcast or don't have a voice. And like they don't have a job and everyone's kinda in this holding position. But the reality is like once they were an economy opens up slowly and slowly, there's going to be that the, the remnants of the pain experience in this year is going to be they're a little people have lost their savings. People have lost their dreams, that materializes itself, just like a did in Germany, in, in, and Hatred. And that can create revolutions that can create unstoppable destructive forces, especially when combined with in an ideal log.


That's a terrifying to me. Ah, people should definitely study. There's this kind of this discussion of Hitler recently, you know, that everyone says either Obama is Hitler are Trump is Hitler. Its kind of a new set Obama's Hiller a bit when, when Obama was president, that was a really yeah, because a f**k, if this is what people do, I mean, you know, using the military industrial complex and control of the population, that kind of idea. And you know that the thing is you have to separate Hitler, the evil person that created the Holocaust from the general evil charismatic leader that took the country into a use of nationalism to take the country into a dark place in the thirties.


Those are two different stories. I don't think we're going to have ever something hopefully and you atrocity like the Holocaust, but as possible that the pain that people feel we'll be taking a, what would be taken advantage of by a charismatic leader to, to take us, to take steps back. Not, not forward. That's a, that's a real worry. No, no, I don't see that leader on the horizon, but the other problem is even a positive leader. The way politics work in America, everyone is so accustomed to people chopping people down so much. So that one of the things that's a weird about Kamala Harris being with Joe Biden is that, you know, she was, she was talking like terrible things about him during the primaries.


I mean, when she was running against him in the primary, she said horrible things about them. And then when they brought it up on the Cole bear show, she was like, it was a debate. Yeah. It was a debate. Like, is that what a debate is? Like, I, by any means necessary, you will distort your own views of a person in order to diminish that person so that you can succeed in, they fail or do you really mean that? And that's why he said it in the debate and you're willing to compromise whatever your ethics are, your morals or whatever are your perceptions. This person is are because you want to be the vice president, its one of the other, either one is not good. And I think it speaks to the, just the standard way that people debate and that people run for president in this country.


It's about tearing the other people down. It's not about what you can do, what you want to do. What's your vision. It's about how bad that other person's gonna do it. The job, how bad there are, the person has done at the job who, what a terrible person in there, what what's let's distort their character. Yeah. So turning into a game, a rap battle. I mean, my worry is that we're going to in A 20 to 24 or 20 to 28, a Donald Trump jr. Versus like AOC. So you basically take like the most entertaining Instagram accounts or whatever, is it in the most divisive ones who is going to have the best means of tearing each other down and he'll become a reality show. And of course the media would love that because it, it makes it a, it draws more eyes because we generally are drawn to controversy, to drama and funny drama like this kind of shallow do derisive kind of a conversation, basically Troels on both sides.


We are drawn to that as opposed to the Andrew Yang type folks who are like, let's all get along and here's some ideas. Yeah. It's and that's why he so refreshing. Right? Exactly. It, it also, you know, you're an entrepreneur, you know, it's a, it's a different kind of a human being that it is running into. The rate is not a career politician. He's a guy who genuinely thinks he can Help. And young young, there is something to that. Just that free time. Shannon is not compromised. To not compromised by that, that f****d up system. When you deal with someone like Joe bod and it has a 50 year politician, my God like your, so its so entangled or your soul crusted into that, He probably doesn't even, he hasn't, he's almost unable to think original thoughts at this time because you're spending on the system for so long.


You can't like sit back and you on Musk style thinking from first principles, like, okay, here's a new problem. What are the ways we have been doing it previously? It hasn't worked. How can we do differently? Lets all cut the b******t. I know there's a bunch of like ties, lobbyists money interest, lets put all that aside. How do we like, what are we supposed to do? We're supposed to, we're supposed to represent the people we're supposed to do something great for this country. How do we do that? And fire again, this is a destructive, a creative destruction fire. Everybody who's has the entrenched old school assumptions that a haven't worked fire everybody and hire new energy and well, you don't have to know Revamp the system too.


So there is so much to do that. Okay, well this is all the time to do it. And there's a hunger for that. I know. I think there's a hunger for a populous that wants to revamp the system. Right? Right. You are just a matter of whether or not they're to actually be able to do it. I mean there's so many checks and balances in place to sort of prevent that from happening because there were the word about someone doing it for the wrong reasons. Well, is that right? What if, if there's a positive view on a, our current president, Donald Trump is he showed that you don't have to follow the rules. Right? You don't have to follow the rules of the system. You can just fire everybody, the checks and balances. You can ignore them. Yeah. That, that should be inspiring to positive leaders say, you know what?


I don't even if young, even if I'm an AOC type character or whatever, I'm on the ride. Even Donald J. Trump, a junior, sorry Donald Trump. Because he's also a J I know While he's a junior. So we must be a J. OK. Is that okay? You know, the way junior work's you have to have the same middle game as well. Okay. And I believe so. It is that correct? Well yeah. So yeah, that I, that should be inspiring to young leaders to say you could, you can revamp the whole system. That was one of the criticisms of Barack Obama is that he talked about change and he hasn't really changed much. And I think it's possible to change.


I think there's something gross about juniors. Yeah. Just the name junior. Like how can you be your own f*****g person or the third? The fourth. Oh God Thurston Howell. All the third. Like the queen, like the King ligands Island. Yeah. Its weird. Like, come on, dad can come up with another f*****g name. You on an original t**t. You know, I'm going to give me a different name. Yeah. I gotta walk around with jr. Donald the forth Lex Fridman jr. Just a little Lex. Yeah. And then had like multiples. That's the thing, like the sound of that. It's a tradition. And how about George Foreman? You know, he names all his kids, George, George, all of them. And that's I think even his daughters.


Right, Right. That can be true. That can not be true. It's true. And then you have on the opposite side to Elon Musk, who, who named his kids f*****g right now? What does the alphabet? Yeah, my name's his kid after a Jett and all kinds of a weird s**t. Not at all. He's named a few daughters, other things apparently. Oh, George has. Yeah. Well he's got a lot of kids, right? So there is a Georgetta you know, that's a weird move or ms. Pat had something or an Instagram about the NFL players yesterday about ah, like seven NFL players' have fathered 50 to children from 48. Oh there was one guy that like 26 kids the couple of years ago on or something like that.


So crazy. Teach them Matt about condoms. Good Lord Sur. Yeah. That there is no way that you're taking care. All of those fields is just, one is 14. If someone is 14 kids, because three, 150 grand are, so I'm one a year to support eight of them. You have to pay. And like your only eight of 'em are why bad? What about the other ones? Hey, you all got different deals I guess. Oh boy. Right, right. No, it's too easy to make people, you know, the problem is it's pleasurable and it is, we're all like super drawn to it. Cause it's part of our DNA to be sexually attracted to whoever. And that's how you make people.


It's crazy. It's like, like hunger making people, you know, because people used to die so easily cause we don't run fast. And you know, we're basically like water balloons And died birth like close to it at a young age often because just medicine advanced so much. So we are able to save kids for sure. And nutrition, injections, all of that kind of stuff. I know I can't, I haven't looked into this carefully, but there is a, this seems to be a lot of debate about whether to worry about overpopulation or not like I've, I've posted these like projections of the population of women were going to reach 10, a trillion people, a billion people.


And there's a lot of debate of whether that is like we should be worried about or not the on one side and the natural caring capacity of earth. If people say we have way more resources than we need is not to worry about this. Nothing to worry about. How are those resources allocated? Right. So like some places are very resource poor, but they have high populations. That's a gigantic problem as well. Most of the population growth in the 21st century will be in Africa. Like if you look at the bottle's in Africa, we'll have, I believe more people than the rest of the world. By like the end of the century, it's a population continues like this. The, if you talk about large families, they're happening in Africa.


The thing about Africa though, is it actually can fit most of the worries in it. When you realize how big Africa is. I had no idea until we started doing this podcast and Jamie pulled up, this image have like Europe and Asia on the United States and all these other countries stuffed into the continent of Africa. It's only then you realize how big Africa actually is. So it kind of make sense. Yeah. Space-wise yeah, but also a resource why's there. I mean, I'm, there's a lot of people suffering in Africa as something that will keep a blind eye too, but there is a real suffering poverty, right? It's interesting that some animals have mating seasons, you know, like deer have mating seasons.


They go into the rut in the fall and then the, the, the Doe's are in estrus and they give out the scent and the bucks go crazy and that chasing them around. But they only do at once a year and in the spring they give birth to the, the new Fonz. And this is like, it's really common in the wild for animals to have a season two chimps. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. I wonder if there's ups and downs. So, so humans have like a mating season around like Christmas, the holidays, and then it, it goes down and the, in the January month, I think Only game animals, meaning animals that or prey. And I think predators just go buck wild.


I think predators breed, whatever the f**k they want it to. You know, I don't know if that's true though. I mean, I don't know like if like lions and tigers, for instance, I know I had a bit that I used to do about tigers. Cause I watched this discovery channel show. What does it have been? The female tiger is in season. The mail can meet with her as many times. It's a 52 in a day. Wow. So they just don't get it after it, but I don't know how long that lasts when they are in heat. Right. Hi Jamie, could you look up the, a, the meeting, a seasoned for lions please? Yes, please. Yeah. It goes in captivity. Lions often breed every year, but in the wild, they usually breed no more than once.


In two years, females are receptive to meeting for three or four days within a widely variable reproductive cycle. During this time of pair, generally mates every 20 to 30 minutes with up to 50 copulations for 24 hours. That's wonderful. That sounds weirdly like my life actually once in two years, it's good. Well maybe a predator, sir. Yeah. Well it's interesting. The wildly or the, the, the reproductive cycles. It's like, it's not predictable, like a, like a, like a prey animal, you know, but I would also think that nature probably over the course of millions of years, balances that out with overpopulation.


Like they realize like, Hey, if there's to many Lyons, like what, what he eats Lyons, very few things eat Lyons, right? It is occasionally a hyena. I'll get one with a broken leg and they'll take it out. But the reality is mostly his line is doing the eating. So if you can have too many of 'em yeah. But like DIR and things like that, Well f**k man. They they make babies. And then they can like, literally overwhelm are a resource area. Or if there's no predators, you have to have predators. So there's like some sort of a balanced, like nature sort of figured out the best way to keep the animals healthy is to only have them breed once a year. Yeah. Yeah. It's amazing how evolution finds.


I need a balanced for all of the contributions. God, but that's okay. I'll let you get away with that. God and Jesus. I just know we're in Texas, bro. Yes. A gun's God and America. Yeah. That whiskey scotch. It is amazing. I mean, natural selection and just evolution in general is so fast. You know, what's amazing is I talked to Sarah Seeger. There's this whole group of people that look for life. I dunno if you know what exo-planets are like, are they looking for a life out there? You know, some people think that there's a Jupiter, a moon of Jupiter, a your robot has a has as what that means. It's a fascinating to think that there is life currently, or at least recently on Mars.


You know that, and its fascinating to think what are the evolutionary process and those planets as resulted it is. And when we show up, I talked to somebody, I forget who, Oh, I take a biologist, a colleague faculty at MIT you mentioned that. Cause my worry would be if we encounter life on another planet, is that they would, it would be destructive to us humans like or we to them one way or the other, because it's a it's entire, I mean they, they can do like I, you know what this virus we are experiencing now my natural thought, I don't know what I'm talking about with biology, but my natural thought it would be like, when you touch that life, it might basically be a parasite and take advantage of use them.


But he said that likely it would be, there's a certain kind of distance that happens if there are, if it's far enough away in terms of the kind of energy uses the kind of environment and is adapted to that basic won't even notice humans. Like, you know, you don't know how to take advantage of the resources we provide. Its like that that's a hopeful message that we'll basically could study it safely right now. But it isn't that just purely expect a little bit because if it's in a Goldilocks zone, then you have something that is also carbon based biological life that as a C or similar temperature range that it exists in it easily could eat us. Right. You know?


Yeah. From, from inside, Right? Like Dorham in the avatar that planet I felt I've, I've always felt like that move was so interesting because its close, right. It's close or whatever it is is not earth, but it's close. And the things that live there or not, they're not human, but they're clothes. Like you can kind of see that its good enough. It's close and not like the animal's and all the weird creatures in the jungle and, and the avatar movie. But the thing, But most likely life will be not close. Right. It will be that's the time I told you about David Fravor.


Yeah. It was talked to recently, by the way. Thank you for I renamed my podcast is just, my name is Lex Fridman it's what I heard you tell that to Joey. Joey Diaz. Yeah. Sadly people should go listen to Joey's last. He did it. He recorded at the last church are of what's happening now I have so yeah. So he just suggested to him that he should do some new thing total and you just named it after himself. And it was like, why the f**k am I have some silly name? Like artificial intelligence? Just, just name it. Like The Joe Rogan Experience I never had Lex Fridman Podcast so I talked to David for four hours. Yeah. What hat bring that up for you? Because David Fravor, you were talking let's explain who David Fravor was.


He's a, a fighter jet pilot for the Navy. And he discovered a UFO off the coast of San Diego that when they tracked, it went from 60,000 feet to one feet in a second or less, they don't know how fast it went because its, you know, the blip of a radar. But the thing travelled in an insane way, the defies, all of our understanding of propulsion, all of our understanding of physics and this thing also actively was blocking their tracking systems, which is an act of war. If you know, with the Soviet union or China was doing that that's tactically in active Wars, this thing was doing something that show that it was intelligently aware of the fact that they are using tracking devices to try to lock in on it.


And it behaved and moved in a way that defies all of our understandings of propulsion systems. It didn't give off any heat signature and a, the people from the Navy that he was communicating with saying, yeah, we see these every now and again. We don't know what the f**k they are. The thing I was going to say, this is a lot interesting things to say, well this, so just the way I just remember that it felt like from that entire experience that because they didn't have a Chinese or Russian flag on it, whatever he saw is we tend to just, the entire system is doesn't want to acknowledge it. Like you just, you don't know what to do with it. So they actually, most of a like when you returned back to the ship and there's a bunch of pilots that I'll put, you know, that saw it there, that does a lot of people that witnessed it.


And then there's also the video, you know, the majority of the people didn't know what to do with it. They just went on with their day. Like nothing happened a, you know, they kind of made fun of each other or whatever before, you know. Yeah, yeah, sure. Borough, you saw alien's but like they didn't, they didn't know how to comprehend it. That's what I meant. Like if we can count on a life from elsewhere in the universe, we think we would be a, as a population excited, but it feels like just like with book Bigfoot, we want, we're excited by the mystery when they were like, when there are just out of reach. But when they're like I'm among us, that there are so many mysteries and incredible things among us that we just kind of take them for granted.


And yet we don't even, or ignore them actually even worse. We ignore them. We used to things. And that, that was the weird thing. The, the biggest mystery to me about a, what David Favre saw a lot. And then also with the, the other videos in 2014, something like that, that go fast is like, it wasn't a bigger deal than I thought it would be. Right? Well, the big deal was when the Pentagon came out and said that they have recovered some vehicles that are not of this world. Now they didn't expand on that. There hasn't been more conversation about that, but My, this is purely speculation.


My speculation is they are slowly spoonfeeding us information to allow people to be more comfortable with the inevitable arrivals or something. If they believe that something's coming, they don't want it to happen all at once. You see what happens just with, with the pandemic, you see what happens with a George Floyd. You see what happens with any way, any time, there's a big shock to our system and there's chaos on the streets. It's an unmanageable. And if the UFO is came in the middle of something like that, like Jesus Christ, like who the f**k knows what would go down. If I was someone whose in a position of power, I would say, listen, this information it's going to get out. It's inevitable. So why don't we let people know now just give them just in words, say we have recovered crafts that are not of this world.


Say something crazy like that. Let print it in the New York times to get it out there. And then slowly drip out more information. When they see these videos, they'll get more and more accustomed to it. And then eventually to be like masks, like you walk down the street, everybody has a mascot and you don't even think about it. Okay. So let me, but you know what I'm saying? I totally, and this, this is such a fascinating question. If the government is in possession of an alien spacecraft, what is the right way to release that information? You mean, the problem is if, if it's more potent than any weapon that any, any civilization has currently on this planet. So if the United States is in control of this vehicle, that is more potent and can do things like if you really do have something that can go from 60,000 feet to one foot in under a second, that, I mean, that's that defies all of our understandings of speed, right?


I mean, that's so fast. If you could do that. Well, there's arguments against, cause it could be human, creative technology too. This is just 15 or 20, 30 years out. Like the stealth bomber was developed a secretly. So what defies it's our perception of its movement capabilities is what it defies. But there could be some tricks on perception that, I mean, that's the whole point where the stealth bomber is it's difficult to detect. Sure. And so there could be the same kind of tricks on perception that you could just be playing different kinds of a amazing secret human created a technology that a is able to deceive the human eye. That's a good point. I mean, but the, the thing about it is they attract it.


It wasn't just that it was the human eye that saw this and it's deceptive, but also like stealth bomber, you know, the way it's designed it, it blocks radar or is it a radar doesn't catch onto it? I think it is possible that some human created technology that so far advanced from anything that we're currently there, the way that we currently understand, like in terms of like main stream propulsion experts in, in a fighter pilots like David Fravor and military people, it is possible that some civilization, one of the, one of the big civilizations on this planet, whether it's China or Russia has come up with something that's above and beyond what everybody knows, but it's not likely, that's not likely that they've made that much of a leap.


You and your sense on the other side and fatality and technology, see, I'm more optimistic to me as a scientist and engineer. And to actually David favor says, it says this to, in this time of pandemic and this time of like just, just hard, negative news everywhere, they will be nothing more inspiring than the government in an inspiring like Neil deGrasse, Tyson way coming out and saying, we have not releasing the videos like they did, which is, I dunno if you know, but they just put the videos on the website. Like there's not, there's nothing is just videos. They're just like, you would like some boring documents that describe like Nothing and they're not inspiring. We're not talking about like Neil deGrasse Tyson or like Carl Sagan, cosmos style, like a beautiful, inspiring what is more inspiring than an alien space craft look here's is a fascinating mystery here and there is nothing more inspiring to us humans.


Then there is life out there, intelligent life out there, But how would you handle it? Like, lets imagine, lets imagine you are the leader of the United States and you find out or that, you know, whatever the head of the Navy military intelligence program, whatever, whoever you are, you're a person that's in a position where you realize that this thing is from another world and you have this responsibility to try to somehow or another publicized this. Yeah. Like I would, I would, I will, I would approach it as a hundred percent from the perspective of science. Here's a mystery. So forget weapons. Like, you know, you mentioned there is this inclination to think like how can I figure out a way to use this as a weapon to destroy Russia or China as, as opposed to seeing it like, like going to Mars, colonizing, Mars, or going to the moon originally there is some competitive element, but mostly it's a human pursuit of understanding and human pursuit of overcoming are limited knowledge to sort of unlock mysteries of this universe from a physics perspective, from an engineering perspective, I would release all the information I have and I released it in a way that gets than the other guys, Tyson folks in the loop.


So it's, it's almost like an inspiring effort for our us as a humanity to understand what the hell this thing is versus lets keep it secret and see if we can use it as a weapon. Well, I appreciate that. You think that way because you're a scientist, you're thinking about it in a very positive way to try to expand our education and our understanding of This this thing. And maybe we could, you know, use it for good, but you gotta realize that anything that's surpasses any and all technology's that we currently enjoy it in terms of fighter pilot's and Jet's and military superiority. If there is something that just as above and beyond all, if everybody has a model T and you have a Ferrari or better yet you have a Tesla, you have a model S and everybody's got a model T U you are, this is a, and then you run a race.


Like you have something that is so far above and beyond what everybody else has. It's not really a fair race. It's a joke. You will dominate if that, right. If you are in a, you have a model T and the other as a Tesla and you are racing. And the winner gets to decide who has all the food who gets all the women, who, who lives in the nice house. Like you're going to win every f*****g time right now, if you have a UFO, if you have a, a spaceship that comes from another planet where there were a million years, more advanced than us, they've had a million years of evolution and technological evolution dealing with elements that are common on their planet, that they would have to be created on a particle Collider here. And they only exist for a brief amount of time.


If they have something like that, that's powered by something that we can't even imagine. And you figure out how to use that here on earth. You will have technical superiority, technological, superiority over every other civilization. Every other time Entry in that technological superior is so funny as Chimp's are like still talks about our village. We won our village to be better. The next village, when there is an alien civilization, that's a million years more advanced that we can easily destroy us. If we wanted to write it, or actually understands the nature of existence in this universe on levels that like, which we, we chimps talks about like meditation and, and finding inner peace.


Like it understands on such a deeper level, like the nature of consciousness, the nature of intelligence, the meaning of life, all the weird stuff that we're so obsessed with and understands it on another level and hear, we are thinking about what the Russians are doing versus like understanding that mystery. I think in the face of that mystery have something that's far more intelligent than us. I think we can't, it's a ridiculous notion to think we're anything but a one human village. And in terms of weapons, it can cause you said like get all the girl's or whatever. But I think the weapons thing is the key things.


And we were, we are ready. At least the major nations have all of the weapons. We need to destroy each other. It's like, we don't need extra weapons. Well, I mean, it feels like, it feels like a, your hypothesis will be like if an alien technology was here and we'd figure it out, we'll be able to have something that destroys other Chimp villages or an order magnitude more efficiently. Then you have a nuclear weapons there by having an asymmetrical sorta from a game theory perspective, a power over other nations. And we can tell China and what to do, what I can tell if I show what to do, that's it that's the perspective for which they are thinking.


I just, I am not even saying that. They're thinking that way. I'm thinking a human would think that if they had control of this vehicle, I'm not saying that the alien's would think of this way. I'm thinking of also that we are constantly innovating when you, when you talk to a people that are designing Jetts and plane's and fighter pilot's, and they really are talking about new systems that they've created in a new, you know, new, new weapons. They don't just sit back and say, we have enough weapons to destroy Russia and China and the rest of the world combined. So we're just going to stop there. This is not how human beings innovate human beings are in this constant state of wanting the newest, greatest innovations.


We want to improve upon every single existing invention until we hit some sort of singularity point or whatever the f**k we're striving for as a culture. And that would be that propulsion system. If you, if you do really have something go from 60,000 feet to one feet and less than a second, you're dealing with something that we don't understand. We can't do that right now. And if we, if you could figure out how to do that and propel people that quickly, it would be a game changer. Now, how much of a game changer? What does that mean? Well, we were in this weird place where we kind of agree to not use our best weapons, right? Like when there's, this there's a face off between the United States Jet's and a Russian Jett, and then they come close to each other, like over China or something like that.


It's weird because we're not shooting at each other, but we're real close. And even the missiles that we have there, not nuclear, like we will, but we're involved in, in a skirmish with another country, but it does, we don't use all our weapons. Like if we approached war the way people approach the war and you know, the, the middle ages, we would just nuke the f**k out of everybody that talked s**t. Right. Anybody, anybody with a challenge to say, what did they just say? A f*****g launch, those missiles, right. Instead of Twitter, I will be nukes. Yeah, Exactly. So we are already in this place where we don't use our best stuff we are already.


So if we had something that made us fly better and fly faster, or the real question is that yeah. How much would that change the world? I don't know. I don't know how much it would if we got in control of some UFO and were able to get to China quicker with how much of a difference would that make in terms of like the way they responded to our military. We're in this position now where there's multiple countries that have the ability to destroy other countries. There's a, a, a Iran has some sort of a nuclear program. Pakistan has a nuclear program. A India has a nuclear program, you know, of course the United States, Russia, China, there's many countries that have the ability to f*****g wipe out huge numbers of the population like that.


Just launch just one crazy psychotic leader who just decides to just listen, we're gonna f*****g make our Mark here, everybody together on one to three go, boom. Sure. No, that's, I mean, that's such a difficult, he talked to Snowden is such a difficult ethical question. Like if I actually had that information, I tend to lean a little bit on the side Of its the duty of every American to leak that information, to take it and make it public. But I understand that it takes a huge risk of destroying the world because a eval people can get their hands in that information. That's the, that's the Bible's is our question, right?


No, no, no. Oppenheimer's dilemma. I mean, when Oppenheimer, who is a very peaceful man created the most destructive weight or helped create the most destructive invention the world's ever known it's a conundrum, right? Like, but doing so, did he present a lot of other death because Germany would have gotten it or Japan would have gotten it and they would have used it on Europe, but they would have used the, in the United States. Is that possible? That, so that's the argument write that there's a race going on in the people who understand that splitting the atom and it is possible that nuclear weapons are feasible and whoever gets him first, it's going to have a massive advantage.


We got I'm first and therefore, you know, we became the preeminent superpower, but what if we did, what if Oppenheimer was the dummy? You know, if there was a, a bunch of knuckleheads work for the United states' and the Russians and the Germans and the Japanese, we're all working together and they came up with something far better. Obviously the Russians were against the Germans in that war. But if you fit together any super power at the time, if they got together with their scientists and they figured out a nuclear bomb first and just dropped it on San Francisco, well, how much would the world be different now? Yeah, I mean, an in Russia, I mean, stolen is a complicated figure. So here's on the size of the United States at the time, but evil is f****d, but evil, evil.


And if you have nuclear weapons, that's a whole another discussion. Yes. And it's, it's actually quite surprising to me that we got out of the 20th century alive. So from a perspective of, of Oppenheimer, you know, ah, I think he probably wondering if we're going to destroy ourselves within the next decade, no matter what happens when you have wa when you have weapons that can destroy all of our civilization, especially now with a hydrogen balls, it's a, it's complicated. Talk about anything like LA and technology. Yeah. Well, I think that's probably, I mean, if I was an alien and that was paying attention to earth, it's probably why it would visit, you know, and be like, these chimps are in this weird stage of evolution where there are still chimps, there is still behaving like territorial apes, but now they have nuclear technology.


They have this very crude version of the, literally the power of the sun. Well, that's what, okay. So here's another hypothesis. They saw these destructive weapons. And so they actually a in Roswell a play or whatever it is planted a piece of technology that we should figure out, they'll be an infinitely powerful generator of love versus destruction. So there was like, okay, these Chimp's are not going down the wrong path, let us plant some stuff. Or are they figured out like how to be enlightened mushrooms? Yeah. Mushrooms this way. That's what they did. They would try that because they kind of its where, you know, from our perspective, the chimps there like a nice video game there or like a chia pet, were you watching them grow?


And they probably that's what we would do if we encounter, maybe I'm like an ant colony. And we saw that the end colony is destroying itself. You know, us from a scientific perspective, we'd want to them to not become extinct. So probably interfere in some way to try to prevent the in calling from destroying itself. That's all there. So, you know, as far as a curiosity, as a cosmic, it feels like earth has a cosmic curiosity from your perspective of an intelligence alien species like that. That's a really interesting what's going on there. Lets lets see what's happened. All right. A friend of mine told me the story that he saw to mounds of fire ants and, and that he did this experiment where he took a bucket and he scooped up aunts from one fire ant colony and scooped up and it's from the other and then dumped them on the opposite colonies and watched them fight to the death.


And that was like, f**k really? And he goes, yeah, they are instantaneously new that those ants or from the wrong Colonie and they just went to war. And there's a, I don't know if you've, there's a few good books on ants. They have like a collective intelligence. Yeah. Because we tend to think of the individual ants, but somehow as an organism to get together in the thousands of ants, millions of vans, there's somehow a collective emergence that a, a collective intelligence that emerges like there's this whole field of a computer science guy and colony optimization. If we just simulate nature, inspired optimization algorithms, they somehow figure out how to do stuff in a, in an emergent way.


Don't really understand. We don't have a mathematics to deal with. Like when you have a bunch of a way, when you have a bunch of distributed organisms doing, doing dumb stuff, just looking at their neighbor's. When you look at this system as a whole intelligence stuff emerges that's that there, there is a, I don't, do you know who Steven Wolf from his no chance when you know who Eric Winestein is? Yeah. So they're a Eric Weinstein as a, either of the million intelligent thing he does. He's also a mathematical physicist. So he has like that theory of everything that you've talked to him about, or he blew your mind with geometric unity.


There's another guy, really brilliant guys, Steven Wolf from he's a physicist. He created a Wolf from alpha. That like everybody uses in highschool for us to do their homework and calculus. It's a, you can ask it a bunch of questions, like a, how much does Joe Rogan way or something like, you know, like it has a, I dunno, I dunno if you can. I dunno if it knows about Joe Rogan, but it might, it be interesting. I see CMS. It has like is a huge knowledge base. Maybe it doesn't know the individual people. What does it say free class right now? I mean, what's it say? It just had like Google information, But it is able to integrate a really well, so like I can do math on this information.


That's a really important thing. So you can do like, you know, you can calculate a, a, you know, the average population of Austin, coz as the information of number of people, the number of the area, but all of that, whatever is it really useful tool, but they also came up with this Wolf or from physics projects recently where he describes is another theory of everything. I do. You know, what a theory of everything is? It's a, it's sort of, its a unification have all the different laws of physics so that when one theory or you can describe everything that's happening around us. And the reason I bring that up, cause they were talking about ants, Steven Wolf, from his idea, he has this like Have inf like here's this model of the universe, this, this what's called a hyper graph.


Is this a really simple system that grows with a single rule? Like it expands, it starts from just a couple of points that are connected with Aline. And then it grows with a single simple rule just like ants interact really simply this system grows. And his theory is that it can grow into create our entire universe. Like from it, it doesn't have a concept of space or time. Like we perceive it at the four dimensional or the three dimensional space in the, in the fourth dimension of time. But all of that emergencies within the system, we Chimp's are one in 10 to the 120 is part of that, that incredible infrastructure that grows.


And he like mathematically describes the way this thing grows and that we don't currently have good mathematics for modeling the way systems grow. There is something called cellular automata where it's really a call a game of life. Unfortunately, John Conway that created that game of life from the diary recently from covert, it describes is a very simple system where from simple rules you can have incredible complexity. And so really cool idea that our universe started from like basically like one ant and then, or actually to ants. And then they, their interaction crates, a system that so incredibly complex, even though the underlying rules are simple, that we don't understand why the hell that happens.


We humans as a, but from a scientific perspective, we know how to describe like a single system, the way an object Moves. We don't have a math or even I'm a science of describing how trillions of objects move when they interact simply with each other, but don't know how to do that. But that's what seems to happen when you look at, we know how to, you know, psychology can describe the behavior of a single human while we don't have a science of his to describe what happens when a billion humans interact. I dunno if that kinda makes sense, but like the is called the complexity a study of complex, What is this, Jamie?


This is sort of, this is what a hypergraph yep. He just started an explanation. So of all this of stuff. So if you, so if you look at any of those, if you zoom in on any of those graphs, I mean, ah, when the previous page in those, the previous one was really good. So if you zoom at any of those below, you see all these beautiful little graphic things below it, there is like two boxes. And, and that describes a rule of if you see a Pat on the left, an expanded to the patent on the right and the entirety. So his hypothesis is one of these rules created the universe where this little rule of, if you see a Pat on the left or create a Pat on the right, it creates this incredibly rich graphs from which emerged this The, he's modeling all of quantum mechanics of general activity.


So the theory of everything need to unify the physics of the big, which is a general relativity special relativity. And then the physics of the really small, which is quantum mechanics. And he, within those grass is able to find the emergence of these theories first, the emergence of space and time than the, I mean, everything you need to describe for a quantum field theory, all of that kind of stuff. It's it's trippy. That was a bunch of really cool ones. Is that a I'm right there? Nope. Who is that guy surprised as a teacher, just a guy, there was a, those images that you showed in that graph. Like, you know what that reminds me of, do you remember the movie arrival?


Yeah, he was a Wolf. Oh, okay. He was the designer, right? The language. Ah, well, if that makes sense, Such a cool task as a physicist. Oh my God. I'm like, can you design a method by which the aliens may be communicating with it Kind of being that looks like it and, or similar to But For the math behind it. So the, the, the, the language, she develop those a mathematical response to the, the, the language him in his son. You know, when, when you get this far down the intellectual rabbit hole, when you go the, to the, like how many people actually understand this too, the point where they can, they could read it, describe it accurately.


Right? But the, this is insane. That's the, that's the problem with the theory of everything is very few physicists. Really understand like the, the, the details involved are talking. You have to be its the same as the order of magnitude of professional comedians. I would say it's like thousands may be maybe less than a lot of the whole planet on the whole planet. But the cool thing about the Wolf from thing as a set physics aside, it's just the app, a the, the part that a lot of people can understand and I highly recommend like curious undergrads and really you don't need to know how to program. If they understand how those beautiful things and the language and a, the movie arrival you can grow from simple rules, you can play with it.


Like it's a, it's one in the most beautiful in terms of maybe take some mushrooms. And, and like, if you want to see S a beautiful concept is have a system that's really simple, like a few dots. I could tic TAC toe board and have rules that apply to that board, that a really simple once a portal and like the beautiful patterns that emerge like you, no, I can give me an example of a rule like that. So the rural for the game of life is for like something like a tic-tac-toe bored is a cell. That's white. Is it a dead assault as black as alive? Lets say. And when the three of the cells, NABERS are also alive, then you live on.


Otherwise you die. Meaning if you just flip out, you know, so, you know, when you have three neighbors and it may be getting the exact rule wrong for the game of life, but when you, when you only each cell only looks at its neighbors and when a certain number of NABERS is alive, I think is three. Then you continue to being black. You continue being alive. Otherwise you die. It's a live die. And all your, just a single cell sitting there and you live and die based on your neighbors. Okay. It was dumb. I mean, its very simple. You, you think what could be a created from that? And you can create everything in the known universe from that. So like people have created computers from that, from a touring machine.


Like the pattern is that emerge. You can create all of these kinds of fractiles you think like, Oh it would create some kind of a repeatable regular pattern or something like that. It would be something dumb, but he can create, these are the like, like that it is a one, one really important thing is the cell just knows about itself. It doesn't move. It just knows about it itself. But when you zoom out and you look at the results from the system, it looks like there's objects running around like the individual cells aren't running around, but it looks like the object's of running around. You could have messengers, you can't have what are called spaceships, which of these mechanisms that use the cells and, and move around. Like if you have any gifts or videos of it, like there's stuff that moves.


And it seems like it's intelligent objects that communicate with each other and all of that emerges. And you can sit if you just think about it a little bit, like you have to remind yourself that sea, like this animation right there, it looks like there's a moving object. Like it looks so I think these are called glide or guns or something like that, where they shoot off objects of different kinds. And like you think, but at the individual soul knows nothing about anything except itself and is nearest neighbors. And as a result you can nevertheless have arbitrary complexity objects have arbitrary size and move around a live and die like that. Like I said, a do any kind of competition in the world.


It makes you realize that it's possible that this universe is just some simple dumb rules on a scale of 10 to the 120, like an ant colony, just that just scaled our, like an insanely to an arbitrary degree. And then we're just, there is wear like this clueless apes that are just the result of that. We're not able to perceive at all of the, the, you know, much, much smaller level, the simplicity that's happening to us. All of this seems like it all does. It seems complicated to us.


Like this table seems like it's wood in a way we don't perceive the atoms. We don't perceive the quantum mechanics or you don't perceive whether a strength, Thiery or something like, well, from his saying like these objects than it is interacting at a microscopic for a far smaller than microscopic level. But it may be that there are really simple rules that just create all of this. It seems complicated to us, but the it's something that's I think is nice to appreciate for people from all walks of life, how much complexity be created from a simplicity, from a simple rules, how much richness, beauty, just it could be created from scratch.


Isn't it also really interesting that everything tends to move towards greater and greater complexity? Well, so this is, I think really important and it's surprising in general, the second author thermodynamics says that everything becomes more chaotic. So it's not complex. It becomes more boring that he Def in the universe, that's a, everything moves apart. Everything becomes eventually eventually. But the thing is that there's pockets of complexity and that these pockets keep getting created of some interesting stuff. That's a little like chimps, like the interesting stuff keeps getting created. It's not obvious that that should be the case.


Yeah, but just life in, in general, do you think if you go from a single cell organisms, you go from bacteria too. What we know now as human beings, just to think about that, all the different steps that had to take place and it moves towards greater and greater complexity, greater and greater ability to manipulate their environment greater and greater ability to understand tools and three D space and, and how to manipulate things. One of the things that I've always been about what the concept of aliens is, what if, what if the general direction that we're leaning in as a society? Like if you think about human beings today, where we were so much more civilized in human beings were 5,000 years ago, we are, we're a different thing, you know, were, were less murderous were a less, less inclined to be physical.


We have much more access to inventions, much more access to technology. Technology was nonexistent back that we have electricity. We have computers, we have all these different things, but it's moving in this direction more rapidly now than ever before, in terms of the innovation of objects and ideas. If you go back to a computer, like I remember I got a flat screen computer for the first time. I don't remember when it was, but I remember I looked at one in 1,995, I think it was. And it was like $20,000 in 95. And it was basically the size of that panel. And it was like a flat, I forget what, what the technology was at the time. It wasn't LCD or a plasma.


That's what it was. It was a plasma television. And it looked like dark s**t, but it was thin, fairly thin. But today it would look like a brick, like a crude mud brick that someone made the jungle and it looked like terrible. And I was like, that's ridiculous. I'm not spending that much money on that f*****g thing. That's crazy. So I got a regular TV, but now you can get a TV like that for nothing. They were like, you get a TV that size that's far better. Like an LCD screen, beautiful 4k pro like a hundred bucks or something like that. It's amazing how much the technology has changed and how much better it's gotten many years. That's the blink of an eye in terms of the history of the world. Right? And then you stop and think about iPhone one iPhone one was 10 years ago, 13 now 2007 and it looks terrible.


You ever pick one up? I still have one. I've found one on one. It was moving out here and found an old phone. And I'm like, look at this like a s**t it's crazy. It's small. It's clunky. His screen looks terrible. The cameras, dog s**t. It's just everything about it. Slow awkward. Now you go to, when I have, now I've an iPhone 11 and it's a 11 or 13 years later. It's infinitely better. Its so much better of the camera, the zoom capability. And then there's this giant technological race for Samsung's coming out with a new note, 20 ultra with the f*****g 100 X zoom where all these different things that are happening when it's, where we are in this weird technology race.


If you looked at us from afar and you said, well, what does this organism do? What does this human organism do it well, it does a lot of things. It creates culture. It has different rules and religions this time. Okay. Okay. Well what does it do? What's the end result bees make honey, what do people do? They make technology? And one of the things that we do in terms of like keeping up with the Joneses, materialism, all of these different, weird traits that human beings have, what they lend themselves to is technological innovation. Because if you're a materialist, do you want the newest, latest, greatest thing? Like what year is that car? 2018? All you haven't seen the 2021 so much better, like, and like a 218 car is f*****g fine. It will get you around. But if you want to impress people, you got to have the 2021.


Well, one of the things that's weird about people is how materialistic we are. So materialistic. There's so many Instagram pages. They're just filled with people with nice houses. And let me look on my s**t, look at it on my, watch, his looking at my This look at all my, that. I mean, this is a, the thing that drives and it, it, it drives consumers', it drives commerce and commerce drives innovation, innovation drives technology technologies. What we create, we just do it in a, in a weird way. We do it through sex. We do it through social status. We do it through a well the need for respect, for envy, all of these different things. But all of that really does do is drive technology.


And is that ultimately the end of the line? And if you look at the big history, one of the quotes that Ilan tweeted for it is from Andre karpati of the head of Tesla autopilot, a shout out to Andre, one of the great machine learning engineers of our time. But his quote was a few bombard, a earth with photons as long enough. Eventually we'll admit a Tesla to like you basically, if you look from the very origins, its like, you just do, the son just needed to provide some energy to this thing. Like he ended up a little bit and eventually will start creating Tesla's and then emit them into space. It will get us started to have like a rockets. It's a, it's a true, yeah, it's true. You did it. That has happened.


So right now And, but it's accelerating. This is why, I mean again, the, the Elon set of exponential growth idea, it just seems to be getting faster and faster and faster. And which is us as humans. Aren't able to reason that way, like most of the technology we see around us as a, about a hundred years' worth 150 electricity radio TV. I know most of the medical innovations from antibiotics to, to just, just every single day, it's a, it's a surgery. Do all the kinds of the two. Most of the innovation is in biology and chemistry, modern physics, even. So obviously computers, internet, all of that.


So there was a hundred years of 150 years may be and it's accelerating and S so our ability to think like, what is good possible in the next 10, 20 years is, is a flawed. I mean, that's one like what we talked about neuro link. That's why there's a lot of people kind of unable to reasonably like were how quickly a people in the scientific community are aware of how little or how limited our understanding of the human brain is on the neuro biological level. Just neuroscience, just a basic functional at the functional level.


I like how the brain functions. And so they think like Well many of the possibilities that are especially exciting with the technology like brain computer interfaces, like with neural link, his must be a 120, a hundred, 200, 300 years away. But the way things are accelerating is very possible that it's 50 years away, 30 years away. I like the, the ability to, to digitize memories, you know, to be able to replay memories, the digitize like Ray Kurzweil dreams about digitize the minds of humans. So in a mortality, you know, like I mentioned, Sarah Seager, right?


Where people should check out or a new book. No, that's a bit more, but she, she searches for up exoplanets planets. She was one of the key people in discovering new exoplanets and a proximate Suntory is the closest that we think of a or a planet or, or at least habitable planet out there. And that seems to be too far away unless you're able to digitize humans. So as soon as she said the easiest way to travel to that, to that planet, to see if there's a extra terrestrial life out there is to digitize a human and send them on a ship. It because you can then travel much, much faster than we could otherwise it's and you can have multigenerational obviously travel because a, you know, A digital form of, of no Out of the human mind have consciousness, intelligence, all of that kind of stuff.


They could travel for fun for millennia, right? So that's an exciting possibility to, and most people will say that M you know, we don't really understand much about the mind and in order to understand enough about the mind to be able to digitally convert it to digitally store it and be able to ship it to approximate centaury would be centuries. One of the exciting things about, and you were a link to me and a long term is that they are really pushing instead of making it centuries is making a, decade's just like the bringing together the best engineers and scientists in the world and saying, this is a This there's this, there's a, Oh, this is ripe with innovation.


There's a possibility here to do something truly special. Not only need to understand the, not only to help people with neurological disorders, which is a huge, obviously goal or mission, a dream to alleviate suffering, right? That's that's as good of a mission for a group of scientists is any, but also that we can understand the mind, we can expand in different capacities of the mind, like expand intelligence, expand consciousness, and to spend all the different kinds of capabilities of the mine and be able to digitally store that mind. So understanding to a degree to where we can copy it to it can store it to, it can transmit it out to distance stars and to meet are alien friends' in digital form.


You know, that's the mind blowing mission for a, for us chimps, right? Yeah. That's what I wonder when, when I think about alien life in the tic TAC, UFO of the David Fravor saw like the, the idea that that would be biological, that there would be some sort of biological life inside of it. It seems a little retro, Right? So everything about that seems retro. But our interpretation of like one thing is to David's general inclination is I think he said, I on your podcast with him, his life, he wants to fly That. And his first thought was like, Oh, don't want to fly that thing. You have the animal in another plan. And I want to f**k, is that a dragon?


Like, f**k that's based giraffe. Right? My question to them was like, why did you think that's something you could fly? I could get that to me. It just seems preposterous. That it could be a thing that could be a flied To it's preposterous to me that there's an alien on board. It, it, it, it could be just the reconnaissance a, I mean, That could be what, what life becomes. One of the things that I've been thinking about when it comes to neuro link and, and all sorts of medical innovations in, in terms of artificial limbs and a different prosthetics that people are able to concoct today. Well, how close are we do those as being better than the biological alternatives, right?


Like how, how close are we to then, like, if you lose your arm, they actually give you a $6 million man arm. That's better. You know, you remember that movie, the TV show, Steve Austin, or a man barely alive. Remember that? Do you know you're not old at all As well, and I'm going to the Soviet union. So we didn't have any of those problems. Right. There was a, a, a movie that was a TV show. It was about, it was an awesome TV show. Well, for me, when I was a kid about a guy who was, I think he was a fighter pilot and he was in a crash and they rebuilt him with artificial parts. But the artificial privacy, you had like legs, he can run 60 miles an hour, or he hit a, a, a hand. He can f*****g just crushed you with his hand. And it was wild stuff, man.


It was fun, but it was just science fiction television. But if they do get to a point where they have legs that work better than your legs, and they feel like your legs, like I have friends that have fake hips. I have friends that have resurfaced hips and resurface knees, or they've, they've, you know, terrible arthritis or cartilage damage. And they've just replaced the part. And now they work. Now it works great. They can, they can do things like my friend was a bad hip. He runs with the bat with it at this fake Hipp, John Wayne Parr or the Thai kickboxer. He he's throwing kicks now with his fate KIPP. He just got his, his leg was fixed to months ago.


I think And is a, on his Instagram. His got him throw in high kicks with this resurfaced, his left leg. Its crazy. When, when is he gonna come do a point in time were they can replace you're eyes with a better versions of what you have now. And they work better. Like it's not, I know you're scared, but it's no big deal. It's like glasses, but it's way better. I'm going to put these things in, in where your eyes used to be there. Magnetic women love them. Or if you don't have them, you're gonna look at the loser. Well, your biological I's one of these things that were seeing are the ultimate symbiotic interaction of biology or the initial biology and technology would have neuro link is just one step into us, essentially giving up our biological heritage and becoming a part of, of the future.


This idea of artificial life is it is a weird word Right because it's not artificial its right there. So it's real. It's it's AB its made with things that are different than sells, but it's still light. It's a thing. If you can create I'm you know, like the touring test write, like you could create something that seems so real and interacts with you and contribute. And it can trick someone who thinks like the movie, the ex Mokena, you you're you're in it. Like I fell in love with that robot lady and you went to, she was hot and she was, she seemed like really nice. You know like, like why am I still hung up in biology? What's the big a deal. You know, see if that becomes what people are.


If you can download your consciousness into some thing that looks like a human being and a, your consciousness rides around in this creation, this technological creation, maybe that's what aliens are. And maybe that's what we need to do to get past these territorial ape instincts that we have to like, look at a spaceship. We go, I want to fly. That was looking at an animal. I'm going to f**k it. You know, like that idea of wanting to go over to a place and dominate it, you know? No, I think that one of the key things we need too, we might be able to get past is the eye in that sentence, the concept of individuality, the concept that like I'm a UN that there's an idea.


And like I am this meat bucket that like that somehow is special and unique. And so on that they go to the ego or the consciousness, like it feels like something to be me as opposed to like, maybe I'm just like a little fingertip, have a much larger organism like, and be able to see like, you know, it's a very possible that that's what intelligent life form is look like is M something much less individualistic. And if we look at an colonies and a, if we think of the individual ants, it's a very different way to think about life on earth than the collection of the ants together, or feel like a look at the collection, have the humans together as an intelligent organism, combined with the technology that we're creating, all of that becomes almost a single organism.


That's becoming more and more intelligent that the idea that there is a hard line between biology and a digital technology that we're developing it really from an outsider's perspective, that line doesn't exist. We're all in an interesting, complicated mush. Oh, that doesn't have a concept of individuals doesn't have a concept of ego or individual consciousnesses. It's all one thing. And we're just adding more to it. And well, you know, w w with neuro link, its not, you know, B people kind of think that there is going to be some kind of leap into the a totally transformative, you know, it's a thing that totally changes the very nature of our civilization.


I think it'll just all be gradual, just like from my phone one and two and three, all of the technology will slowly expand our capabilities. It won't no just like the human eye I developed through an evolution, the eye developed a revolution. It, it was gradual. It, it wasn't like, it just appeared. It just something that slowly allowed you to, since the environment better and better and better and better. And eventually something is nice and crisp and sexy as the human eye emerged. And you know, the other concern people have is with like surgery and so on that that's, that's also really well, you know, it's a difficult thing. Like I got LASIK surgery, for example, you mentioned ice.


That was a scary thing to get. Yeah. When did you get it? Five years ago? Maybe how'd it go? There is a, like a lot of people talk about it is when I woke up in the next morning, I could see like I could see for the first time it was beautiful. And, and it was like, I was kind of angry that I didn't do it earlier. And that was the, a lot of people describe it as a, their experience. Now what happened a week later is I forgot what it's like to not be the, I took it for granted basically a day later, but like a week later, it, it was like, I, I wasn't, I already forgot the entire of magic, have the experience.


And I know that's what I think will just keep happening is there's this gradual a little step, this little, this little leap into a future that everyone we'll go and, and say, wow, it was kind of cool. And then they will forget it was cool. And then they'll go back on Twitter to complain about some, some divisiveness that's happening in politics today. It will just constantly, you know, will all of a sudden, a have a capability to just have some extra level of telepathic, for example, in 40 years. And then people would just be like, just like we got used to swipe writing on the phone. They'll, you know, at first it will be like, ah, first the people will be like, I don't know. I don't, I don't want it.


I'm not sure. I want the government to know what I'm thinking next. They'll they'll just like, try it all. Be like, Oh, this is kind of cool and much easier to type type on Twitter. And then next it will just be like, that's it, we're all communicating telepathically and all that happened. Right. Well, there's still be so many pros to it, to not, not ever be able to lie. I mean, if we're forced out, I mean, one of the biggest problems with people's being deceptive, like we have this ability to communicate, we use sounds that relay intent, and then you listen, you, you, you go into your own dictionary and your own a concept of what these words mean. And then you, you convey what, what you think. I am saying, you, you, you interpret what you're saying, I'm saying, but I can be b******t artist.


Right? A lot of people are like, when, when you talk to someone who is the psychic and they say, You you have a relationship with, there was a woman. Yeah. It was a woman kept talking. She you're not clothes, but you should be. There is yes, we should be who is this person and your life, my mother. And you can see, but you, you know what I'm saying? Like, this is what that is. If you could really look into their head and go, Hey, f**k face, you don't see anything. You're lying to me. You're, you're pulling on my heartstrings. You know, I'm lonely. You're trying to manipulate me.


So then you can make money or are you talking to my dead mam? You know, like your mother wants you to be happy. She wants you to donate your money to charity like this. Person's not really talking to your mom. They're liars. And there's a lot of those people out there, all that would go away. All the, a bank fraud and a manipulation with politics, Oh, that will go away. Or a politician won't be able to like, cause you're going to look right in their f*****g head. You will be able to like, Oh, they don't care at all about America or, Hey, he's a really good person that really does think that we can get along. We really can work together. We have enough resources. We should behave as a community as a giant 300 million people community.


And that's possible it can be done. And like, look at this, this guy as a murder, or we didn't even notice guys walking around, you murdered three people who were a bit, have a seat people to see in the people's minds, you be able to, no, this is all, all this stuff is incredibly tempting. When you, when you think of something like Neurolink or, or, you know, once there is something like that, there'll be multiple different versions of it. After the, after a while, when those innovations start to roll out that what we will give up, it will be just like all the other aspects of technology. We will give some things up and there'll be a bunch of people that do reminisce for the retro days. Like, Oh, the good old days when we wanted to send a letter yet, or to write it down on paper and a due to a horse, like a f*****g like, well, who's that dudes, Kevin Costner movie, the post man.


Remember that a terrible f*****g movie, but post-apocalyptic a post man. It was the most important guy because he could get, get your letters for that kind of s**t. Like we, we give up something to get this new thing. And then we decided this new thing, like not very few people or giving up their cell phones and going to flip phones. Very few people are going no phone at all. Very few. All right. There's what's the matter of Jamie? There's a bridge. I just read the post or a real quick, I've put up on this or the year, 2003 to 2013, one band walked off there. Horizon and hope came with him right now. I've okay.


Cool. Wow. You know what? The greatest movie of all time is Waterworld. No, it's not. It's terrible movie, but you know, it's good. The water world show at universal in a Hollywood, but I don't think they could do it anymore. I think California is so g*****n draconian and their restrictions. I think that got it locked down, but that's the way that water world movie is a, that is a citizen Kane compared to the post man. Post man is a steaming pile of s**t. It's so bad. It is a really bad movie. Right? But some are actually a Kevin Costner is, can make really bad movies and make them somehow watchable. No, it makes a really great movies to dances with wolves.


It was f*****g incredible. And that's all him, you know, he, he's made some awesome stuff. No doubt about it. You know, I mean, you might the pros and cons. I like, I really liked the replay have memory. I dunno if that connects with you. But I remember that the idea of that, like I remember it sounds weird, but so that this is what I get a chance to talk to you on a afterwards. And he had this funny comment. I mean, he thinks in weird ways, right. But his comment was that if we, one day will be able to replay memories. I wonder if this is a memory that you and I would choose. And it made me think like, I certainly would.


Cause you know, there's a, there's this momentous, like I will probably replay this very Podcast and my, in my mind, there's this experience. I remember like, you know, you do this a lot, but for me it was a special experience. I was sitting with you and Erik Weinstein in the back of the comedy store. I remember during that moment, I'm the awkward and scared and nervous. I remember thinking like, like I didn't have, I didn't want to take pictures, but I wanted to like store this. Mm. Because it felt like a historic moment. It was just that lineup. It was like the who's who of comedy doing? Just short little bits of comedy that entire night.


It just felt like it felt like history. Like I was, I stepped into the Coliseum, like it got to hang out with a glad gladiators and it not To be sort of, it felt like that had to end. At some point I get rushed and I start to like, think about how how's this going to end. But it felt like is it, this is going to have to end eventually this is, and while you were right there with a virus, the virus and, and its an end of an era, but there was a special moment that I would want to replay that It's hard. I have similar feelings about how special it was, but it was hard for me in the moment to think about it because I, although I did appreciate it as much as I could in the moment you can't dwell on it too much because you're in the, the middle of the creative process.


Like stand up comedy is an ever changing, constantly evolving process. When I have an act, I get it to a point where I can imagine recording it and then I record it. Then I start over. But during the whole time of making it, I'm always tweaking it. It's never done. It's just, it's constantly being f****d with, I'm constantly putting this first and that second in switching the order and, and, and, and doing this part of the bit in the beginning and then switching it to the end and then adding something and maybe, maybe being more sneaky with how I a revealed a punchline or how do I do this in that? And so there's, this is this process as constantly going on, you can go, wow.


You know, I mean, I know, and I knew during the time, like this really is the golden age of comedy. It's a very special time and this very special place. I knew that. But I also knew that I couldn't think of that. I can't, if you just had to keep moving, What about, so that's the comedy side, but what about the camaraderie? I mean the, the back of the comedy store is that the camaraderie of like how, when is the next time you say we reopened the economy when his, the next thought it was going to be, all of those comedians is showing up regularly to one place, right? Versus we have moved. Unfortunately, Joey Diaz moved to New Jersey for now. What does that That about? Well, what do you think is slowly becoming the Soprano's right?


Listen, once the winter kicks in and he understands that he f****d up, I'm going to call him. So I'm gonna, I'm going to present Texas as a viable opportunity. Hopefully by then I'll have a club here. That is that the number one goal. So the goal was to get here, set up, shop, put together this studio. Okay. We got that going. We're up and running. Now goal number two was a comedy club goal. Number three is a ranch going over three is to be able to Podcast ranch. We do all kinds of wacky s**t. They're you got to come back to the ranch we are going to, right. We were going to have Duncan trust. I'm going to live on the ranch. F**k you. I'm guaranteed. Duncan will come up by the way. The greatest, I mean, as far as just the fan Dunkin is I heard you try to talk them into moving to, to Austin To move to North Carolina though.


That's where he's from. He's a guy from Asheville. I think he is a design's on that. But if I could talk them into moving here, one thing we were both talking about doing a television show or doing a podcast, rather doing a show together. I don't know why is that a television show, but he and I are doing a show together, like a regular show, like maybe once a week, just, just me and him sitting down and shooting this s**t and talking about like once a week. So I think we of a weird connection here, he, and I we've know each other for so long he's to be at my roommate. And you lived in my house for a little bit and you know, I've known him since he was a The the guy who answered the phones, the comedy store. Yeah. You know, I've known him forever. So to speak in the beginning of his comedy career.


And you know, we've always been real close. We were weird together when we bring out something weird in each other. Yeah. I mean, the positivity that he brings, he just says this weirdly positive view of the world yet. And yet like, Oh, like just like the crazy theory's he has a, about the way the world is a haze, a special human being. If that guy exists, I'm easy to enjoy ideas on the other side of that. Yeah. He's chaos. Joey does this chaos. If there was a, you know, like an, an element called chaos and it had like a physical manifestation, when you could say it like an Aetna, like an avatar of chaos, it's Joey Diaz.


He would always bring the party. I always said, when, whenever we go on the road, Joey Diaz bring, bring to the party. He was always the guy that was just like, like, if we were out at dinner, Joey was always stealing the show. He was always the funniest guy or the room is always the, the mad man. And he also, Joey Diaz works best when people love him. When he's around people who love him, when he knows you could just be himself. And so, you know, all of his crazy stories and preposterous, exaggerations over the top, exaggerations about things to be all done for comedy. That's him, You know, when you watch great chess champions play against each other a or like great, like Muhammad Ali versus Frazier was the moment when I saw Joey go against Alex Jones.


I thought, cause, cause you said like crazy. I thought like I thought like Alex Jones is the, what is it? The Frazier like there's, you know, there's no way you can take that guy down in the, with the art of conversation, which you are Wages. Well, it was back when Alex was on the radio too. So Joey is talking about storing weed under his balls and sneak it in on a flight to Texas and Alex, funny enough with censoring. I'm so sorry. I know it was, well, this isn't real. Hang on. I'm just joking around ladies and gentlemen. Yeah. Jay, you know, and there's a lot of those characters or the comedy store. So at a special place, you miss it. Oh yeah, yeah, I do. But it doesn't exist right now.


And I'm a realist, you know, and also the way the place that existed in Los Angeles is not the same Los Angeles. That place is f****d right now. It's f****d. And the mayor's f****d in the, the governor's f****d and they've done a terrible job of managing the pandemic and the place is in ruins. It's a mess. LA is a mess. How does it get unfucked it's going to take years. So here's my worry. So you have a different, you, you know, LA you know, the comedy store, my worry, I got not to brag is a very weird, but it got recognized than the way to hear. Or four times it was a weird, congratulations is a very weird, listen, I'm now you're a celebrity.


You f**k you. But have never been recognized like that, that, you know, You have been on this podcast. How many times now? A five or five times. And, and so do you know how many millions of people who've seen you and I have the right, The product. I mean, the podcast I do is a little more technical. So like the kind of people that they don't, it's a, I can, I can see the difference between the people who recognize me from Rogan and the people that recognize it from the Podcast. I do it's to different. Like, there are usually just like you say, shaved head tattoos versus where like digits, like cauliflower ears, right, bro. And actually women to a, but then for guys, if you could tell like, OK, this guy's is have a CEO have some company or like it's a programmer.


That's more that We wear that suit and tie everywhere when you travel. Right. No travel usually. Cause I hate traveling. I'll go jeans and shirt. Well, that's true. That's my pajamas. Yeah. That's how you sneak by. Yeah, because with the, this suit, is there a uniform? They recognize me with the mask to its weird. That was a weird, that's weird. It makes me think like, Oh, I recognized you from the I's in the haircut anyways. But the, the reason to bring that up a weird typologize no, no. The, they mentioned two of the people actually mentioned that they're leaving San Francisco because their tech people and their says, one of them moved to Austin and that the, they said that there are people are fleeing San Francisco to fleeing, fleeing this, the term fleet.


Yeah. And that's the right term because San Francisco is insane. You know, San Francisco, it's an app where you can find the human s**t in the city. Cause its so numerous, it's so prevalent, you know, so many bombs or shedding in the streets that they have Apps. I like how you went to that. I was referring to some, another aspect of it, which is its not even San Francisco, its the entirety of Silicon Valley, which is there is a very much a group think, yes, that moved away from a meritocracy of where we want to innovate and change the world with our ideas to a little bit more like of, you know, I dunno how to put it, but I kind of a group think that pushes against that.


And so people are trying to like if you're against in the house. So a, well it is. I mean it's what Jordan Peterson talks about. Its the identity politics tends Try to silence the desire within people too, to, to judge you based on meritocracy, both based on a skill based on hard work, based on the passions on it changed is the topic of the conversation in a way that moves. Like if you were a kid guy or a girl who dreams of changing the world, he start a start up. Like the last thing you want to be talking about is a less than you want to be doing is playing dining politics.


Well, do you want his higher, the best people for the job, men or women and you want to change the world. You don't want to be playing, playing discussions that, or like a, that are going on in gender studies, parts of academia. And so there's a kind of group think that can hold you back with in places like Silicon Valley with in certain parts of academia. I think these important conversations to be had, but they needed to be had at, by a nuance and a nuance without being a bully. So most of the people that play a dynasty politics, Twitter, they talk about, you know, all really good things. They carry the flag of justice or fairness of, of the quality of respect and love.


But like they don't like the flag, but what they do is they bully. There's a toxic nature too. It and they attack, I get attacked Actually for, for you, you know, not having an equal distribution of women on the podcast where I interview. That's something, I worked very much on who to ask you for those, you know, a small percentage of people on Twitter, but they, and I ignore, I never responded and I always send a telepathically. Love it. I mean, that's all it can do. There, there are two things. One, there's probably been a pain in their past. They're hurting. And to me it's probably from their perspective, enjoyable that's social game to say, I want, I want the world to be more fair in saying that.


And then everybody like a assess, you know, congratulates they're themselves in each other for saying, I want the world to be more fair. What? They don't realize his by saying, by calling somebody like me as a fraud or a B or sexist is absurd. Is your desk you're putting hate out there as opposed to love. Like I'm annoyingly, tweeting about love all the time. Like I even a note and myself sometimes because I'll have a mood where I'm like I've tweeted before, like life is beautiful. I legitimately, I was sitting like 30 at night and like with a stupid smile on my face and just like, this is awesome.


Life is awesome. It was probably because. Awesome. And then, and if you could call me as a fraud, like that's not the right place for the movement. They do that because I'm probably an easy target because I'm like, look, there is a nice guy. He looks weak. Like they think I'm weak. And On the, in the space of social justice warriors on Twitter, I am weak. I wish we lived in the LA and in a place of like working with equality and fairness, I could fight people to the death based on some things that I can gladiators, like stand in front of each other. As long as it's a consensual, I would love to fight to the death for the ideas I believe in. But on Twitter, it's not, that's not the battleground of ideas.


It's a, it's a weird, weird place right now When you are disconnected from the actual real human interaction. So that it's an unnatural way to communicate. So of the things we were talking about about Neurolink or something along those lines that we could get to a place where you could actually read someone's thoughts. I mean, do you know how gross it would? Look, if you could actually see virtue signaling and its, it is an actual, like a clear manifestation, like, Oh, I see what you're doing. I read your mind. You're hoping someone's gonna love you by saying mean things. You're hoping that women are going to say thank you for being a champion of women, Mike, you know like for standing up that Lex doesn't have enough of us on his podcast.


We need equal representation. We need a quality of outcome. You know, this is the, this is what identity politics is all about. It's all about calling people out. But really what it's about is finding Target's and attacking and very little gets done in a positive way. If you look at what's the positive aspect of identity politics, like what's over the course of the last five years, what, what good has been done when people are terrified? No, a lot of people will attack people on Twitter by how much good has been done. Well, it's, it's complicated. Like I think about the reason. Okay. I always try to find the silver lining and things and the way I think about it, a first of all, I've become more conscious of the fact that there's d********s in this world in terms of there was a lot of sexism in academia, for example, just like boys clubs, stuff like that.


It, well it's, it's just fundamentally disrespectful towards women. That's out there, there is d********s and there are often, you know how it like Joe Biden touches like people's hair. Yeah, there there's a creepiness too. The way people behaved. And I think when they have power that power yet, right. People have power that they behave and a weird way. If you're a guy in you're a professor like traditionally professors f**k their student's right. I mean, it's a, the most, one of the most common things was like the professor and the graduate student. Wait let's, let's like rephrase that.


Cause I don't know the seventies. I don't know if that's traditional, but I do, But we know, we know it's a, it's a common comment. If it was very, very, very common. Now it can get you in deep s**t. Now it can get you a deep platform. They can get you fired by the university. It has a lot of downsides because your getting in the way have love. But as an that you getting in the way of d****e bags, so, or cancel culture at the, you know, you have a Jordan Peterson getting millions of views, highlighting the ridiculousness of cancel culture. But at the same time, cancel culture also helps highlight the real d********s out. They're the real facts. The, you know, the, the, the ridiculous aspects to over talk.


The overextension of the me too movement is arguably worth the positives it created ultimately, or ultimately, so maybe not in the moment, but if you can look at the people that were wrongly accused, right. But if you look 20 years from now, it would probably lead to progress. Yeah. It's like saying Gingiss Khan was good for trade. He opened up the path of trade to the East. Well, I mean people and people make the same argument for Hitler. Yeah. He, he re he rebuilt the German economy. So that argument, nobody makes the argument that like, Hm, on the overall Hitler was good for him, you know?


Like a, so I don't think But, you know. Yeah. I think, I think you're right. I think overall it's good. It's good that, listen, I'm not a woman working in an office with a boss that is treating me like s**t and wants to f**k me and sexually harassing me. And I would imagine that would make your life. Hell, I know. I can imagine if I was a woman and I had to kiss some guy's ass in order to get a promotion and this guy would make disgusting remarks about me and try to f**k me. It would break or worse, or actually physically do something to you. I would imagine be terrible. So that look, I'm fully in support of that. I've daughters, man.


I don't want them to never have to experience it. It kind of s**t. Again, I am glad that people they're, they have to be accountable for things like that, that we do make, I think workplace is in general, right? Ah, first of all, everyone, it sucks. No one wants to be stuck in some place all day. But also you have this weird culture in these workplaces where you're around all these other people and these people you see sometimes more that you see your own family, they're around them for eight hours a day and you don't even get to pick him. Right. They're just the people that you, you automatically worked with. And if your, a woman and your in a situation where you have to work with some man who has power over you and is abusive, it would be hell The, you know, there's a workplace kind of interesting.


Cause I dunno what to do with it because a lot of people find love in the workplace. Yeah. Eye to eye as a rule. Like never like I turn not at that point in my brain off of the work place, because I feel is such a difficult game to play, but I've been hit on by coworkers, like in a positive, not a power thing, but like you're close. Yeah. You wanna, and then I was always running away from that because like, what I imagined in my head is what happens in, when we break up Right what happens? What, what, like, if we have a fight, like, which is human relations, they know like the, the drama of that, this is hard to get.


Right. And I think the, I mean, from an individual perspective, I think you shouldn't, you shouldn't play victim. You should take this situation as much as it is and make a sort of rise above it, whatever it is, whatever, whatever the challenge is, whatever the difficulties, whatever the, of the situation you were in your rise above it, that it from the individual perspective, cause life is hard. So the succeeding in a career is hard and to be stuck in the local optimal of just like of the Have playing victim on the victim hood, I think for the individual is not productive.


But as a society, that's the conversation where you have to have like, what are the victim's in our world and how can we create a world that has fewer right. The victims. And one of the things that Jordan Peterson points out though, I think he's really important to mentioned is that we haven't been doing this office thing that long now, meanwhile, I should like a clarify. I dunno, Jack s**t about working in an office. I never worked at an office in my life, but I couldn't imagine what it would be. Like. I understand people, but that's a weird thing, man. When men and women are sexually attracted to each other and they see each other everyday, I like that very weird. It was very weird. And to just to say, do you have to turn that off?


And, and it's admirable that you do, but some people don't, you know, some people don't, some people have like weird f*****g fetishist or if people they work with And okay. So I'm a, a, a romantic in general. Okay. But yeah, but I'm also a guy like people who hear me, especially your fans who think I'm beta, f**k you. Right? No, not on a sec. Like I welcome you a message me. Well, let's, let's take it out on the mat. Okay. So no, I won't read the comments, but I'm just saying I'm not. Yeah. You are actually challenging them for day to day. I'm joking.


It's a joke. You want to do it. Yep. But if you, you are going to read those comments as someone's going to do are a m**********r. What are you rolling? That's good. Ooh. You're on Broadway. Jitsu in Boston. Don't say That well, anyway, you stay right there. But also a, if you are interested in learning, Jitsu go to the Broadway jujitsu in Boston, which their stroke, every Jim is struggling butt and they open. They are doing the dance that everybody's doing, which is like their doing like socially distance training. It was as possible. So it is in Massachusets is different, but you can do a private training, which means they have the slots have one hour where people show up and train.


Its like I think three people are like two people they trained and they keep A, what do you call it? Every hour of they do different, different sets of people. How do they test everybody is a temperature check. So their doing everything, the law is requires. So every, everybody in every state is doing different things. You know how effective has a temperature check and there's people that are asymptomatic. Do they have a high temperature? It's not about what works and doesn't, I mean complying it it's about what I mean, from my perspective, healthy people should do whatever the hell they want to me to me that let me know. Let me rephrase that. Whoever is comfortable at like the level, ah, I believe in freedom are in Texas.


Yes. This is a water bottle is a maid in Texas. Oh there it is crazy. The, you should be able to choose to choose your actions. And then people who are core either have symptoms or people who are Have are a high risk category that they should stay at home. This should be isolating themselves. But there should be a little bit more freedom to, to define how you interact with this world. Especially at this time, especially where the curve is, but you know, there's rules in Massachusets, they were supposed to follow and you did. So they don't, they don't understand. They don't understand obviously combat sports or like, ya know, jujitsu is a essential for like a lot of people are like for their psychology, you know, there's people going nuts.


Right, Right. That's the part of their, who they are as a human part of their religion. Right. Yeah. And, and is also part of the way of exercising out their demons. Yes. And, and now you have a lot of people sitting alone at home with their demons. Yeah. And it's also a big part of their social life socializing, huge part of their social lives and also physical touch. They're just, there's something about jujitsu. Like the physical touch of jujitsu is very, very good for people. Even though you would think of it as like a violent interaction is actually so much camaraderie that's involved in jujitsu. There is so much a community is so much friendship and, and love and jujitsu, you know?


Yeah. Your, your practice and killing each other, but your, your doing so with good friends who are equally skilled iron sharpens iron, and its very important that you do. Like why do you want to roll with people that are challenging to you want them to be good? You want them to try really hard. It's a part of the whole thing. And you, you feel very blessed like, you know what happens after your done Rowling? You always think each other and how each other. I mean that's part of the culture in jujitsu is a very friendly culture. You know, it's all of the things that I love about a Brazil and the Brazilians is that their they're so friendly. It's a big part of their culture. It's a big part of Brazilian jujitsu. Its like the way the instructor or interacts with the students is a very friendly, very friendly.


Yeah. And now that, that is gone. What do you do? That's it? No, no, no. For a lot of people, if they're going nuts now, if you should go run, That's why I went through the whole Goggins thing have been doing is just, I'm going nuts. I'm by myself. Explain what you did. Cause it was pretty funny. Okay. That's ridiculous. So first I follow two people on Instagram, U and that David Goggins you for the, for the, for the law's, for the laughs. And Goggin's four. Like just to feel like a week b***h and then no one at one point in the spring, I forget one. It was, he posted something about a 48 hour challenge. So when you run four miles, every four hours.


So I did that. I never ran more than 22 miles before then. I just did it, not my whole methodology for doing these things is I announce it on Twitter. And so that like in the moment you have, you can get out of it. I can get out of it. So like I, I saw the post on Instagram. I went to Twitter. I said it I'm excited in my head. Not thinking I'm not allowed myself to think I sent I'm just going to do it and I will figure out how to do it. And so I figured out how to do it. That was the worst idea ever. I don't recommend them For Myles every four hours. So how long does it take you to run four miles? A 40 minutes. Let's say So you have a three hour plus 20 minute rest in between each four mile run and your, your sleeping for three hours at a time.


So you could get up and run. Yep. Yeah. So it's a, it's a mental test of your ability to do something really stupid for prolonged periods of time. Like, because it's not, it's not like running 48 miles at one time. So that's actually probably easier. The is the hard thing is run a little bit, you know, four miles as it is pretty easy, especially in a slow pace and then like shower. It just depends. They made me, I showered almost every time, which is another thing that's hard to do. Cause your like constantly showering and your like, Oh, here we go. I almost didn't sleep at all. You slept like one hour at a time. Really? And then I over eight. So I was eating carnivores, still most of eating carnival or at that time.


So I was eating like I eat a giant rotisserie chicken, like, like your brain starts convincing you that you need like the energy for the fuel. Right. So it felt like really bloated. And like, you don't want to run with a chicken or so in my stomach. And then just like, and then, and then all these demons come out. I mean, at least for me just like, D I like, then you start, I start thinking, you need to delete the comment I did on, on Twitter. I need to, or like the like, Oh this is stupid. I'm a scientist. Like, why are you like your minds starts making up stuff? Why are you doing this? Oh, you know, all of those demons. And then it starts saying things like, you know, you have like all the papers you wrote are s**t.


Everything you've ever done, a s**t like you need to work hard. Like if you, why are you working so hard at this stupid running thing, you should be focused then and doing a thing that why like your career or you Should be all of those things. When my parents come into place, like you, should you find a wife where you should have, they called it all. You talk about love all the time. Why are you f*****g Singal you f*****g, you know, that's the that's, what is it? Doesn't actually speak on those words. But that feel that you feel it. And then, and then you feel that age thing. I mean, I, but like you don't know, it used to be able to wrestle. Like you've never even ever beat anyone good at wrestling. You never have like your jujitsu black book that you don't deserve.


That blackballed, all those thoughts of communications. And so, but anyway, that was The 48 hour challenge. And then in a one day, I think June, yeah, June, maybe at the end of may, I woke up and I had this idea. It was f*****g, the brain is stupid to, to say that, to tweet and say that I'll do as many pushups and pullups as the suite gets likes, don't know why he thought that. I thought it in my head cuz I usually, you know, talk about it a lot of all the time. And I, you know, I get, I don't know, a 100 likes 500, like, I don't know, I guess, but that's not. I thought like, Hm, I need you to get harder and you need to start exercising every day again.


And I thought I'd get about maybe a thousand. So I ended up getting 20,000. So, so I set in 30 days. Right. And that's too much for me. That's that's too hard. So as, as well, in my mind, I thought, as I said, okay, let me distribute that across other exercises. I'll do it everyday. But it might I'll distribute a cross body, weight squats two. So the idea's, you know, coronavirus, I wanna do stuff like have a kettle bell to maybe exercise they can do at home every single day. A but the tweet said pushups and pull-ups only so I, and before that I've interacted with, with a David quite a bit.


So I send him. Yeah, yeah. So I sent him this thing and is just saying like here a I forgot what I said was a basic message. Or do you have any advice and you send me back a video of him or I asked him a few questions and he sent back a video of him answering the questions, calling me out on my b******t. Cause he said, you said in your tweet, pushups and pull-ups m**********r, or however you talk to them. Right. He's like, if I were you, so you did the worst thing, which is like, if I were you, I would, I would do what I promised a, but I understand how things are. So if you like his, so he went on to give you advice if I could pitch out.


So I ended up no, well, what else can you do? So I started doing pushups in full. So it's a F about 500 pushups a day and 170 pullups a day, a, a plus six miles running. I just started ah, well I give every single day for a month. Four a month. Yeah. There you go. My guess is that this is, this is the Instagram days, man. This is when I was like so proud of myself. I was proud of myself that I'm actually doing this. And I think day three is when it all just went to s**t. That's when went to s**t.


So I started getting a shoulder, so I stopped a on day seven, I believe and took 10 days off. So, but I, my shoulders are just overwhelmed with pain and get an MRI. No, no, no, no, I I'm. I know the show, like I've gotten this over use, I it? Wasn't sorry. It wasn't hurt. It was like, I know this pain. Well, right, Right. Well, where is it? A part of the shoulder. All right. It's complicated. So slightly in the back. And I know the pain Well from like, I know it's an overuse thing. Like I did. The when I trained judo twice a day, I know like I know the pain. I know how to treat it, which is like ice, like yeah. But like the rep's are insane for people who are, people have done this kind of thing.


So I gave myself two weeks to actually ramp up to it too. So like I was already, I have a good base. I'm like, I know what to do pushups and pullups, but that was way too much for me. The whole time David m***********g Goggins is with me on the, either on the phone or email every single day. And he's doubling everything I'm doing. Right. Right, Right. So a guy, well he's not doing the squats because he's just had knee surgery. So he's with surgery, doing the pushups. And what do you have done? Two his knee. He doesn't, he doesn't like to talk about stuff. Like I couldn't get a, he, because a, I think he probably just heard his knee just for the haters to think he'll quit.


Right. Well, that's what I know. Yeah. It is any drain, right? Yeah. There was some, some problems, right? He's at one of those ignore guys. We've got Payne's and he just ignores it. What do you got it? Oh, this is the one pulling. Okay. What does it say here? A lot of us think to just because there is an obstacle in the middle of the road. Oh, look at this. They're gonna, they're going to they're polling, all that fluid out of his knee. Whew. What does it say? This is just talking about setbacks. Okay. Here's a more often than not. I've had bad knees, bad hips, et cetera. For 20 plus years. Not let him that stop me and I won't now I find we must exhaust all options.


Find a way. Yeah. Jesus Christ. So he's draining multiple syringes of fluid out of his look at that nasty s**t that's coming out of his f*****g name and how much fluid is it has in his knee. So the thing is like, your knee is a physical structure and I appreciate his mindset. But ultimately if you're draining that much fluid out of your knee got real internal problems and you could f*****g Mann through that s**t. But if you're still diminishing the physical structure, you know? Right. Well, that's a whole philosophy, which is I'm the point that, yeah, there was a video, I think at like one or two or one after this, he's like I'm back m**********r or something or whatever.


So yeah, Whatever he's doing, he's running. Like if you scroll up a little bit, scroll up, I'll show you what it is right there. That one play that Computer warriors, right? Your f*****g messages on those videos. I put up with me on my crutches, me getting my knees drape. You are happy ass f*****g answer. You are all so happy because you thought don't never run a Kenyan. All of that. I told you taking and your friend s**t, b***h. You're a f*****g on me for one minute f*****g video of me. You're going to a whole lot train.


How do I lift the f*****g dedication I have put into my f*****g life? So why do you troll maybe some fat m**********r at home? You were, no, this is for a dedication. Maybe a jealous, who knows, but guarantees this I'll be back better than ever. F**k you. F**k. You don't stay on top. My best. God damn. I love that dude. He is a treasure. He's a treasure. No, but like he didn't in this world where I the reason I stopped actually posting about the thing I'm doing is what I realized.


Especially, probably be the community I'm in. So many people were telling me like that's too much. Like they were encouraging me to be healthy. They weren't understanding the whole point that the philosophy of David Goggins, which is the point is to push the limits of what is healthy. This isn't to get like doing those kinds of reps is not for some kind of like to get back in shape. The moment I agreed to answer, David Goggins is like email and then phone call. And then you're accepting not a nice way for like, I'm like my cardiovascular getting a job. It was to go through hell.


So this is the first time David Dan Gable fame, a famous wrestler, a famous wrestling coach. Talk about the, he always tried to train so hard that he wouldn't be able to get off the mat that if he would have to be cared off the mat and you say, you never succeeded at that, but he always really try to push so hard. Then you literally couldn't get off the mat. And then the results of that, we were talking about the physical structure. He has replaced hips, replaced knees. So, so as a body fat, The internet is very nice and helpful to tell you exactly that, which is your body will fall apart. That's not the right way to do it. When I got people are like, just think you said hi, that obviously you shouldn't be doing this right, but that's not the point.


The that's not the point of this. Like this is the first time I I'm not a crier is I cried three times phase dot on my carpet in this whole challenge. So that was doing all this A at home, just theirs, all different kinds of demons that came out. And just the, so if for people who know pushups and pullups and done this kind of exercise, what happens is it's kind of a, your muscles get used to it. It's not physically that challenging their in the state of just complete exhaustion and what it is. It's almost boring. So it's a task of your mind pushing through a thing that's really boring.


Your muscles are exceptionally sore. They're exhausted. And again, all of those demons of like, why are you doing this? It's like, nobody will care if you just quit all of that kind of stuff and dealing with all of that. That's why, cause it's about the pen depending on the day, but it's at least two hours of pushups and pull ups spread throughout the day. And it's just, it's a grind. And then I have Goggins on me about it always doubling stuff. So I, after 10 days I returned and I, that at that point I did it without announcing it. I did it four, four or five days to make sure I could do it. At that point. I knew I'm going to have to finish even within the jury.


So I knew after 10 days shoulders back normal, I figured out a whole, like I figured out the eating than I'm doing. And they figured out the hole recovery, would you change in the evening? So it sounds a weird, but I, I, I stepped into at switched one meal a day, which is before sleep, which felt good and is mostly Quito in terms of supplements that they are your sponsor. Actually the, that's why I find them athletic greens. They, I dunno why it makes me feel good. It's good stuff. Like, because the words that you have with Kito, I know I'm not, I'm not into nutrition science.


I don't wanna follow it. I just listened to my body. The worry you have is you don't get the nutrients. Like you don't get the Phytonutrients plant based industry right now. You also importantly electrolytes. Cause I'm running. There's a, a, you know, there's a cause you get that the headaches thing A You ever take a liquid IB. You were to try that stuff. Now I swear with that s**t a drink every day. Is that a, is that the acronym is the electrolyte. Yeah. Electrolyte supplement. It's a sponsor too. But even if it wasn't, if they stop being a sponsor, I will still tell people to take it. What is it supposed to a? So they have like A site in sodium, sodium glucose, optimum ratio of sodium to glucose, like w very scientifically researched is fantastic s**t, man.


And changed the way I, I would always get cramps. And once I started using at a stop getting cramps, like, do you think that like hard kick-boxing workouts, hard martial arts work out. So, you know, Hill running their kind of s**t. I can pick your body up, man. If your not getting enough electrolytes, you're certainly draining them out of your system and taking them in the form of liquid Ivy just made it a big difference. Sorry. Are you still sticking to keto site? No, I'm not an a, I don't eat keto, but I'm mostly carnivore. You know? I mean, I eat some salads and I eat some fruit, but the vast majority of what I eat as meet the vast majority, one of the 80%, maybe 80 plus percent of everything I eat as meat.


I don't know about you, but that's one of the things I just stopped wanting to post about it because a one of the exercises and saying, and two of my eating, I just don't. I like positive vibes. If you would get angry, people get angry. Yeah. Not only just angry They they keep telling me it's unhealthy. And I've experimented at wrestle my whole life. I understand what peak performance is on different diets. Like I know my body I've explored and like, learn about what feels good for me. I'm not saying its good for others. I've experimented with eating like seven times a day when I was more doing my power lifting stuff of this experiment.


Like for me eating once a day or eating twice a day in a small window, like intermittent fasting, very low carb. I do two things in my life, which is Goggins type challenges, which is doing the physical challenges and then long periods of deep thinking, deep work. So intellectual work for me, it's a Quito. And once a day focuses the mind like nothing else. It allows me to sit for eight hours at a time. So I usually do two to four hours periods of deep work. So she shut off every distraction and completely focused yourself on a single task or nothing.


Like, you know, for me, the interesting thing is a non, I know that about myself. What I didn't wasn't really sure is with the pushup and pull up thing. What is the right? Like supplementation for that. And I wasn't sure, but I stuck to it. I stuck to basically entirely carnivore a, I would say under 20 grams of carbs, maybe even under 10 grams of carbs on some days. And mostly just a lot of me. I wasn't a calorie deficit. I actually got a little fatter. Really? Yeah. So I was made sure crazy. I was starving. Okay. The sound's please don't slip this out.


But I was scarring. I was starring for me. Like I can remember waking up like wanting like a bloody steak in the middle of them. All right. Well you got your tissue must be so like everything must need nutrients, like so badly, so much protein. You're breaking everything down at such an extreme requirement. Have your body to do some point of that. It's not like crazy. We're not talking with David. Gordon's took it to the X. And of course, of course But doubling. Everything you do is just insane. So a thousand, the a thousand pushups is different than 500 pushups. So 500 is doable for a big like is just, it's a thousand. Is it saying? And it also, I didn't, I know there's certain things on form.


Like I didn't go all the way down on the pullups. Like I did a form of pullup with my, when that my hands are closer together, just save your shoulder, just save the shoulder. So I made sure this doesn't like to prove anybody to this. The other thing, when I posted videos of myself at doing pushups in polos, that's where I stopped his. Like, people will tell me like the, the form, stop reading the comments. Now I, You do how many times during this podcast, have you talked about people saying things to you in the comments and it upset at you? Well, it's been like 10 or to help me out with something then. Okay. The reality is that a lot of other really intelligent people read it.


You mean like Eric, Eric, wine's time. I told him to stop reading them too. Now that m**********r complaints constantly about comments. But the thing is yes, that's a good, but I'm a, so the difference in the United is one, one important thing is I do hope to be one of the technologists that either creates a competitor to Twitter or, or helps Twitter become a better version of itself. So I want to create the systems that, that, that create that community in the comments that are positive. So for me, it's important to understand that the demons in there, right? Well, you're going to have to fundamentally change the way human beings interact with each other with no repercussions. When people have no repercussions, they interact anonymously.


There's just a fundamental aspect of cruelty that emerges. There's no getting away around it. Right? I disagree. I think so. I don't disagree. I think the fundamental thing that happens is some small percentage of humans start becoming toxic. And that drives away. What I believe is the majority of the population core, therefore friendly. Like they kind of conversation. You have a party's in person or No, no, listen, I agree with you. 100%. Most of the interactions that I have on online, even when I stopped reading comments were positive. The vast majority, when you cultivate, like one of the things that I've tried to do with this podcast is talk to people the way I talk to people in real life, a w warts and all that.


The vast majority of my interactions in real life are positive. The vast majority, the vast majority are happy. Occasionally there not occasionally someones a f*****g Dick, you know? And that's just what you run into d******d. Sometimes it sucks and it's annoying, but its a part of life. My internet feed based on this, Podcast based on how people get to know me reflected that it's mostly positive. It's mostly people recognizing what my intentions are. My intentions are to try to get out of the wave as much as possible to put together the best podcast I can do my best. Try and be curious, try to feed my curiosity, just do my best. Right? No, that's fine.


Kind loving. That's not really okay To help people and promote people. Those are that. That's another really big part from me is promote people yet. Like let go, let them help them succeed. Cause I, I feel good about that makes me feel Yeah. Like who the hell am I like for some reason you saw it, you see stuff in people and then you share like selflessly. These are the promote them. We do that with comedians to do that with a lot of even Eric Weinstein of one of the, you know, incredibly brilliant PR Jordan Peterson, it could be argued that he was really propelled forward by a conversation on your podcast. Right? No, I'm happy to do that. It makes me feel good. It's one of the most important parts of this Podcast I think that that I can introduce in doing so it also enriches other people because it gets it in here.


These interesting conversations and, and it stimulates there mind and it changed the way they think about certain things. So the vast majority of interactions that I had online, even before I stopped reading comments were positive. The problem is you'd start dwelling on the ones that aren't like you're doing in this Podcast you are. You're literally telling me everything. That's wrong with reading comments by, by telling me you reading comments and then complaining about the things that people say about your form are the things to say about you not having enough women on your podcasts or the people say you were a beta you're you're going over and over and over again for no reason. It's interesting. But all of those things are completely unnecessary and you are going to fight me on it right now because they see you're gearing up there. You're gearing up for some sort of a response. Yeah.


Yeah. I'm I'm I've been gearing up. Okay. First of all, let me put it cause it's more fun to talk about the negative stuff. Most of my life, the reason I read comments is I've met incredible people. I mean, I'm currently with a very small level of celebrity. I'm fortunate enough to have people that are just full of love to things, love and intelligence like that. That if they made me think they inspire me, this is incredible people. And that's why read the comments still for now, at least I do. I ha I did hire somebody to help me like a fight the trolls a but like to cause you can remove common sense. So on a day that I don't think that's a long form of a longterm solution.


I think the longterm solution is technology. Here's the fundamental problem. I think that 99% of Joe Rogan fans, you can se any kind of percentage are people I would want to hang out with at a party and talk with. I think so too. And I think the comments section should reflect that. I think it's a technology problem. I think what happens is the 1% that don't really want to hang out with dominate the conversation in the comment section. And don't, I don't think that they are more inclined to a comment. Its it's a bunch of things. They, they, there are better at commenting. The kind of derisive, funny thing, like there's a mix of humor and derision, which somehow attracts a certain part in us as like people who click like Hmm like somebody a, this, this is a new studio or we are, I was saying how the studio has kind of like the cyber trucks release.


There is something in people where they want to like the, the funny derisive comment about the way the new studio looks. For example, when you look at comments about your new studio, there's a humongous amount of a really positive comments, but like the ones like the negative ones and their not even negative, there are more like, just like s****y in a funny way. But they rise to the top. That's a technology problem because like that s****y comment drives away. People like me from commenting. I want to comment. I still, I still comment, right? No, no. It's a hard time telling you about wasting so much time thinking about this. No, I disagree. I think there's a place for community and the internet.


Yeah, it is. And if the common thing is, I mean, what they call it something else, they call it social media interactions. Like most people at some level of celebrity, stop checking. They're a Twitter, like a, the mentions Twitter comment's and so on because of the toxicity of the top comments on a Donald Trump or the top comments on bill Gates. So the top comments, I know Obama account's if you look at them, a pedophile is usually involved and its like, how is I'm Barack Obama? Why would I want to interact in the comments with the community that? Or like, please turn your comments off. Yeah. But that's what I'm telling you is okay. You're telling me that's death though.


Right? Your accepting. Yeah. You, your censoring people know that they get insane. Well, they just become accustomed to being able to speak as well. So that's part of the thing, like an Instagram. It's not just that you post something or something. It's an other people get to post things as well. Yeah. And its like, I, I try to fight, like I comment your, the only person on, on Instagram. Why comment on it? Oh boy. Is there. OK. They're fun. They're they are that there's a fun community there. And I ignore, like I actually trained my brain to ignore any of the haters. Like it was just, there's fun. Really loving, intelligent people. That should be the community. Yes.


OK. Now, but you don't agree cause you no that shouldn't be the community. Should it be or the sediment, but it isn't currently. And I think that could be, What is it? Is it the vast majority? It's just the kind of people that comment in the first place. Okay. Let's let's just do a thought experiment. If you have, if you have a million people on your Twitter and a, they are all fans of your Podcast, you have a million Podcast fans. How many of them were going to comment? How many, how often do you, you only see, you said the only comment on my page, how many people comment on people's pages? How many people that have enriched important enriching, important, difficult lives, where they are filled with challenges.


Take the time to comment, s****y things and an internet. Not a lot of very, very few. Most of the people are, they have unrealized potential and they're, they're not doing well. Okay. Let me, can I, can I propose a different thought experiment? Okay. How many people out of those million that listened to the podcast? Mine or yours that have an intelligent, interesting thought that occurs when they listen and they would share it with me. If it was one on one, they feel if I was quite a few. Yeah. That's my problem. Like I think I would like them to feel safe to say something. Yeah. Then they should be, it's just, they're going to have to deal with trolls. Right. But no, but you are accepting the way things are now.


And I'm saying, I think there's a technological solution that I'm constantly No, no link is not only because of the text. Well the, the, the future versions of it that actually allow you to read minds, that's the technological solution to realize that this person is flawed because you know, their, they were abused by their uncle or the, you know, they get bullied throughout childhood or they have a disease or are they, there are impaired mentally. There is something wrong with them. And that's, that's what you're dealing with when you're dealing with a lot of these people that are online that are angry. They, their lives are not good. You know, you are not getting people that live amazing lives and spend the vast majority of the day s******g on people on the internet. But I go to some people's Twitter pages and I see them all day long saying mean s**t all day long, arguing about things all day long complaining about things.


And it's the vast majority of their social interaction. It has to be just based on volume. It's super unhealthy. I see. But I feel it may be optimistic, but I think those people, if you put a mirror to them, meaning you make them realize that are, that they're being toxic, that they could be incentivized. It, it could be encouraged to find the better angels of their time They could be. But a lot of times that toxicity is coming out of a lot of other flaws in their life and their personality. Like you're talking about your you're thinking in terms of your own self, your, your, a guy who did this f*****g ridiculous 30 day challenge, your, your, a guy was running for Myles every four hours.


I like this. That's how I'm a normal human being. You're a guy who's constantly trying to improve your guys' sitting down every day, turning off all your distractions and doing a deep intellectual work. That is not most people. Now, if you could acquire a group of people that are your fans that have similar goals and similar discipline, that would be amazing, but there would be you're friends, you know, That, I mean, that's what it ultimately we would like would like all of our interactions with people online, to be people that we'd love and care about people that share like-minded goals, people that you can, you, you actually can learn from them. You can, you can listen to their words and see their deeds and, and see how they react to certain things and see how they grow and change.


And you, you, you actually benefit from this interaction. There's a lot of people that are online that are not, they're not capable of that for whatever reason, whether it's programming, meaning like what's happened to them in their life. That's led them to this point, whatever failures or insurmountable obstacles that have shown up in their life that have caused them to fall into this rut. That's what you get. You get the numbers of humans' you're interacting with online. There are so many people. And then also you get no social cues. You, you don't feel bad when you say mean things to people. You can say, Hey man, you sucked on that show. And you're like, Ooh, I thought it was a good episode.


F**k did a talk on your show. Okay. You know that, that hurts people if it bothers people, but that's where they're trying to do their trying to bother you. They try and to lash out at You. And the type of people that try to do that are overwhelmingly losers. But I know this is, I have a dream there's there's 10 million plus people that like the Joe Rogan experience. And I are really cool people. I meet them all the time. Sure. And I would love to go to the comment section and be inspired by the positive, thoughtful energies, or even a disagreement that are, that comes from a place of respect in love. Like I go to books for that.


For example, I read books. There is a full of thoughtful disagreement, or just like respectful, deep thinking. And I go to comments to, because they are currently for me, Have 99% of them are that Okay, let me stop you there. This is really important. That's not what your talking about. Will you talk about the negative ones? If all you've talked about is a negative ones. You haven't said anything about the positive ones. You haven't said anything about going to the comments, section reading, inspiring things. You haven't said anything about going to the comments, section reading, helpful thoughts and strategies and different things that people have said in the comments. And it really inspired you. You haven't said anything about that, but you said at least three or four different things about negative comments that people said to the point where you're challenging people to fight you, giving out the address of your ju-jitsu school.


And so I don't listen, you doing what you're doing. Yeah. Whether it's for fun or not, you're doing what you're doing. You're a dwelling on the negative so much that you're literally telling people where you train. You understand that, Right? I mean, part of that. So you're a, if you were doing a good job from a psychoanalytic perspective, but part of that, his for fun, I understand that's what they definitely have a disproportionate in effect, especially for a person who's not. So like I'm genetically full of self doubt. I think of myself often as a fraud, like there's kind of, You know, that's not, it's a full of self doubt. You know what that is? You just have high expectations of your own performance, right? The eye due to listen. I'm an not a fan of anything that I do.


I I'm the biggest critic of everything I do ever. That's just how it goes. I'm never satisfied, but that's also why continue to do things And the, in the toxic negative comments connect to that little part of you are part of me. And I'm just, I'm bringing up the fact that I feel like the it's, the only solution can not be not to read comments. It's a, it's a for now That is the wise advice. You, you are giving wise advice and that's what you have To deal with the landscape. This is the landscape, as it's presented to you, you can't imagine a better world where there's no real solution. Well, cause there's no technological solution to avoid the trolls. Right. Here's the thing.


So I try and build it. How are you going to build it? Well, let me right. Without giving away any intellectual secrets. Well, I, I think systems that know more about you on as a human, in order to be able to incentivize better how to be a better human are needed. So currently the ass system is the recommender systems that feed most of the social networks. YouTube Netflix and so on. They know very little about you. They have a very primitive, a capture of who you are as a human that ultimately leads to your purchasing behavior. They don't understand about your set of beliefs, the source of toxicity, a service of pain, how to, and how to put you on a trajectory that improves as a human.


I think that's an AI problem. I think that's a recommender system what's called problem. And that's where this I've been working on. I'm failing at it. I've been at a pretty low point. Actually the psychologically, but that's, that's a dream for me. So though, the thing that I've talked about before, which is like building an AI girlfriend, it's a, is not a correct way to phrase it. It's more about AI systems being able to no, you well and be an assistant, be a form of connection with you in order to help you become the best version of yourself. That's what friends do. That's what girlfriends partners do.


That's what I think AI systems can do. I think it's possible. And I, I also think that when we get to the next generation of technologies and this is a, we're all in all my three hours here and want to talk to you about you, we're there for the Neurolink experiment, the most recent demonstration where they used it on a pig, tell me like, what, what was that like? And there, there's a big one. First of all, the pigs were very happy. Like a w what they say in that presentation was pretty, a pretty accurate, they love food and they just, they seemed happy. And the people, the caretakers there, it seemed like really good people.


And where is he? Where's the implant on the pig to, can you see it physically? Actually, I dunno. Yeah. It depends on which one we're looking at. I think one of them, they should, it showed three, one day. I think didn't have at one had at an hour or you had it removed. And the other one, I think it was still actively in it. So I don't remember them actually showing like, here it is. And what was the demonstration? Like what, how did they demonstrate how it worked? Well They so, first of all, she could say that I have know insider information. It should like, like, this is very much, they're a company. OK. I'm just some random dude that showed up. Well, you've interviewed you along with the client, but I'm not, I don't have any insider information.


And more importantly, I'm an AI person. So I'm not an neurobiologists like, this is a, this was really exciting to me as a spectator to see biological systems pigs, right. That, that are interacting with computational. But what I'm asking is what was the demonstration? The D the actual demonstration was at the first level was that they successfully implanted neural link in a pig, the pig CMTP doing great. And then they also show the pig that had it taken out that at one level, What was going on with the pig that had Neurolink did it, was there any demonstration, what it was doing for that day?


There were doing playback have the hundred and 20 for, so there's 124 channels. Like the, the electro is a connect to the brain that are firing. They're measuring the New York signals from neuron's and that's time on the X axis. So from left to right that's time, and then vertically that's the 124 points that are lighting up when a neuron is firing and they were playing that back and they played it back in situ way, where they convert the signal into like musical notes. So you can hear the signal its a night and another way to visualize it. But you know, it it's, it's showing that it's effectively being able to read the signal from a 100 site. I think I'm not sure if I was saying a hundred, a thousand neurons or a thousand a day, like a collection of neurons from the brain.


So it's, that's a tour as a magnitude. That's a lot more than any other devices I've ever done. So I like being able to, you know, get signals from the brain at a high resolution one day. The, I think the vision is that a thousand, just like you mentioned with a T V is a resolution, have a thousand is very low. It would be millions or billions or trillions like it is for LCD displays, but this is already have a really effective Yeah. Especially your brain's is going to be filled with wires and then they're going to go, what do we need? His brain four? We need can just come up with an artificial brain. You're not even going to notice. We need to go to sleep. It'll be all gradual.


It'll be a same with, I mean, it's a chase have technology is this may be obsolete and useless by the time we live all live in a virtual reality world. But this is what I was thinking when it comes to aliens. When you look at the alien, the archetypical alien, or what do you see? You see something with a big head, big eyes, no genitals. You know, you, you know, you see know mussels, you see just like if a frame, just this weird structure. And I wonder if we're going to get to a point where we start replacing things and improving things. And we realize, well, there is, there's some problems with our system. And one of the problems is mating. One of the problems is testosterone and estrogen and emotions and all these different things that, you know, the, that the desire to control property and boundaries and all the different things, the territories, all the different things that make people tribal, all the different things that make people angry.


And maybe that's, what's gonna get in the way of innovation. Maybe we are going to get to a point where there's going to be some sort of mind sharing technology. That's why we have a big f*****g head's right. Maybe it's going to be some sort of interaction technology, some, some vastly improved thing that's going to make regular biological function seem so obsolete. They were going to be readily cast on the side or maybe will cast them aside slowly and gradually like the evolution of the eyeball. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, on the flip side, and then you have a link presentation, they talked about alleviating human suffering.


For example, their me one concern is all the things that tribalism, all of the, what does it, toxic masculinity are all of the things that, all of the things that we see as negative, they can be features like the, there is a need for suffering. There's a need of tension. There's a need of violence and war for us to figure ourselves out that sort of removing all the suffering. It, it may not be as productive as we think. Well, it certainly creates competition and competition creates improvement. I mean, this is that, that, that's the thing about if, if everyone just got along and everything was fine and perfect, would there be as much innovation?


And if ultimately this human being this creature, when you look at the overall the goal of this thing, as I was saying before, it seems that the goal of this thing is to make better stuff. Well, the best way to make better stuff is to have some motivation to do that. And that's where materialism comes in. That's where sex comes in. That's where greed and envy all of these different emotions that we think or very bad. But generally speaking, if you talked about those emotions to people that would say their negative, that would put them in a negative connotation, but they might be, what's powering people to move into this direction with more speed. Yeah. And we're, we're all we need to be trying to figure that out.


And mortality has a big part of that picture. People to talk about him in mortality, it feels like, like, imagine if Joe by Donald Trump like lived forever, we would have Clinton Trump. We have these families' just like for forever running our world. One of the things that makes this world run as the passing away of previous generations of previous systems of thought, and you know, so you, you have to always consider like, the things we see as negative is that make up are psychology, make up different characteristics of human civilization's are Have are positive in some sense that a Wars, great progress, they create suffering, but they also create progress.


They create beautiful music and art. They create the bonds of love and friendship. Like Nothing ain't and like nothing else in this world, conflict and suffering, the finiteness of like kind of makes life worth living for many people. That is part of the problem. I like in order to really appreciate the Lite, you got to experience the darkness. You, you have to, no, the darkness is real right. And one of the exciting things about like neural link on understanding our mind is not alleviating suffering, but enriching the way we experience the world. So like enriching this the way we experience suffering the expanding, the way we can experience the highs and the lows it's expanding are conscious is doing the thing they jokingly said with mushrooms, but basically doing what mushrooms do, but in a controlled and you know, much more powerful way.


Well, maybe something can transcend this biological limitation that we were discussing of being a human and that through this innovation, we can reach some point where there's a different motivation and this other motivation might be all piece and love. It might be, it might be that this motivation through this thing, if we can somehow or another suppress all the negative aspects of our biology and enhance all the positive aspects of comradery and love and friendship and do so in a way that's tangible for everybody. That's another problem with things like Neurolink like, how much is this going to cost? And how much does it's going to separate the haves from the have nots ner, you know, Elan was telling me when he was discussing on the podcast.


He said, it's, if you're going to have, you got to be so much more productive. If you have it, where people are more productive, we're more successful. If you need a lotta money in order to get it done, and then you get it done and your more productive and then more successful, ultimately it's going to break. It's going to create a wider and wider gap between people who have everything in people who have nothing. If that, if that individual productivity results in the increase of the gap, but it can also potentially just like the individuals who have created some incredible technology in this world. Do you think about Ford? You think about Steve jobs and Elon Musk is there are individuals.


They are super weird, intelligent, and productive, but they ultimately a better world. Well, the invention they made, so a, you know, No, it's it's as possible. All that the productivity of those individuals actually creates, you know, lifts all boats that it creates ultimately about a world. And as that process goes on more and more people we'll be able to afford these technologies. So like the The Lead adopter is the people that get it in the beginning might have a disproportionate advantage, but the, that disproportionate advantage doesn't necessarily create a negative outcome from the world. If, if they're is, if a David Fravor, when he saw it was actually a thing, trying to communicate that like a has Ilan says, love is the answer is, say, say the aliens we are trying to communicate love is the answer.


And here's this bad-ass pilot Topgun, like the Tom cruise character who just like, wasn't sure if he's going to shoot it or not kind of thing, they want it to fly it. But it was just saying like, love is the answer. Maybe when you expand the mind, maybe feels on a shrooms or wood neuro link. It will be able to see that communication. And ultimately the thing you we'll be able to see will be good for society. It's like, it's not you don't just because it will be more productive wont. You won't try to get a bigger yacht, bigger, bigger house, better cars, but you'll see that we're like all a connected being kind of connected consciousness and that extra productivity you get will result in you helping others more effectively.


You know, that's a, that's a real possibility too. And I have faith in the smart people, working on technologies. People kind of tend to be negative about technology, but I I've. I'm one of them. And I work with a lot of them that people who are best at creating new ideas have they are almost, they almost always have good intentions, but that's not enough. They very often good at doing good for the world. Like, so I've hope that the best people are creating this technology at neuro link. Certainly the people I've interacted with are going to be aware of the negatives and are going to work their ass off to, to make a bet, a world.


One of the most impressive things to me about your people say like negative cell body on. So on one of the most impressive things about Neurolink and the people have interacted with a Tesla in all of his companies, His like there's a few Passion in their eyes. These are some of the best people in the world at just being kids and loving what they do. Like it's hard to put into words, but when you see that, like, that's what I see with you with comedy. I like, I don't know what the f**k, I don't know anything about comedy. I'm just a spectator, But there is a joy that as well. I love seeing people who are good at what they do and love what they do and just losing themselves. It, I have Faith that when you give those people the power to do what they want to do, that it will create a better world.


And that's what Elan is doing. And that's what I wish more companies in groups we're doing that I wish to the us government, we do that more of like have, have leaders that I attract that we have those weared passionate people that, or like just have this fire in their eyes. That's the, I remember, ah, like the early days a Tesla with a, of the first Gigafactory, an opening, I happen to be their like, because I give a talk and it just like, it was like three at night. And the people working in there at that factor in the middle of the desert, the excitement in their eyes was like, like the, you know, the, the, the ladies that like, they looked like they hadn't slept for days, but they're was just this glimmer of just loved what they do.


And that's why I was like that. It gives me faith, but these people, or if these people were building our future there going to do pretty good job. Beautiful. Can I, could I say one thing saying, okay, okay. As a, a poem thing, or a lot of people asking me to sing again, because my sexy voice, and then they didn't know nobody, nobody at my mom was like, Ooh, even my mom, I didn't say maybe, maybe that's second song. You maybe, maybe a, maybe we play piano or something. Know? Umm, I just wanted to say, because we are talking about love. I, my, a grandmother passed away just just several days ago and form for me.


Okay. Everybody is different. But for me she basically, she's one of the key people in my life that raised me. She is responsible for much. Lets say much of the good that I am. So she lived through a go at the moment in the, in the early thirties. I'm not sure if you're familiar with it. Most people think about the Holocaust are the atrocity in the 20th century, but they don't go the mod in the Ukraine. It was when basically because of the decision that's stolen, made millions of peoples starved. There is stories as for another time, if you want to really hear a body as Jordan Pearson about it, I know we talked about it and he, there are stories where its thousands of people practiced cannibalism.


They ate their children. So this is what this, just to give you a context of what starvation does to the human who human being's. Right? So she lived through that. She lifted a world war two. This beautiful teenage girl, woman, uhh, in Nazi, occupied Citi. So all of that and she never talked about it. This, this, this she's a, she was, she's a bad m**********r. And She was, she was the person that inspired me to be strong in a person that also to, to put love out there. Cause like there is a, she loves her husband that passed him in the eighties, but there was always radiated this like deep love for other human beings that was, was forever.


Like the thing, the reason I talk about love a lot is she made it okay for me. My like my dad started to go on tangents, but my dad is this witty Jiu who never, who is afraid to say anything? No, he's kind of like Eric Weinstein. He's a brilliant, he says stuff. That's really interesting. And clever. My grandmother taught me that sometimes. It's okay to say the cliche simple thing. You don't always have to be super intelligent. Super interesting. Super complicated and eloquent. You could just say you can just talk about love and talk to simply even if its a cliche thing So I don't know. I M she was in 91. I just, I just want it to say in this podcast that she's, I miss her and she's the reason for any good that I am.


She's she's a highly responsible for that. So no, I miss you. I love, you know, be Jo my grandma, my aunt, Jen. I dunno if it there's a poem don't want to do, but okay. You don't want to do with it, do it. No, I'll do. I'll do a its so it was a bunch of Russian poems that I think I shouldn't, but I, the, the poem if by a crippling. Okay. I'd love to read it. Okay. It's a minute. Okay. Stop f*****g with that. All right. F**k you. I'm so nervous, man. I should have to write a poem front of millions of beautiful hand.


I'm speaking for the women that probably looking down and shaking her head. Like, why are you doing drink? Like shut the hell up a, if you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blaming it on you. If you can trust yourself and all men doubt you, but make allowance for their doubting two, if you can weight and not be tired by waiting or being lied about don't deal in lies or being hated. Don't give way to hating. And yet don't look to good, no talk to wise. If you can dream and not make dreams your master, if he can think and not make thoughts, your aim. If you can meet with triumph and disaster and treat those two imposters just the same.


If you can bear to hear the truth, you've spoken twisted by naves. They make a trap of fools or watched the things you give your life to broken and stoop and build them up with worn out tools. If you could make one here of all your winnings and risk It, I will turn off the pitch and toss and lose and start again at your beginnings and never breathe a word about your loss. If you can force your heart and nerve and send you to serve your turn long after they're gone. And so hold on when there is nothing new in you, except the will, which says to them, hold on. If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue or walk with Kings and not lose the common touch, if neither of us and our loving friends can hurt you.


If all men count with you, but none too much. If you can feel the unforgiving minute with 60 seconds worth of distance run, yours is the earth and everything that's in it. And which is more. You'll be a man. My grandson. Thanks. Joe thank you. Goodbye. Have a buddy. Thank you friends for tuned into the show and thank you. To liquid Ivy. My favorite hydration drink. And now my favorite energy drink liquid. I is available nationwide at Costco, or you can get 25% off when you go to liquid ivy.com and use the code Joe Rogan at checkout.


That's one word Joe Rogan that's 25% off. Anything you order when use the promo code Joe Rogan with no space at liquid <inaudible> dot com. Start viewing your adventures today at liquid <inaudible> dot com promo code Joe Rogan we're also brought to you by ZipRecruiter. You can try ZipRecruiter for free ZipRecruiter is so effective. The four to five employers who post on ZipRecruiter, get a quality candidate within the first day. And you can try it for free. Go to ziprecruiter.com/rogan that's ziprecruiter.com/r O G a N.


ziprecruiter.com/rogan ZipRecruiter. The smartest way to hire, you know, we're all so brought to you by were also brought to you by Butch or box. They make it easier to get high quality humanely raised, meet that you can trust. You can cancel it any time. It's a fantastic company and they are going to hook you up with ground beef for life. That's right. Ground beef for life is back. For a limited time, new members can get two pounds of free ground beef in every butcher box order by signing up today@butcherbox.com slash Rogan, that's a butcher box.com/rogan two get ground beef for a life.


And we're brought to you by woop the fantastic fitness tracker that I wear every single day. And they are going to hook you up. Listeners is Podcast are going to get 15% off with code Rogan at checkout. When you go to whoop that's w H O O p.com. Enter the code Rogan at checkout and saved 15%. You get to know yourself on a deeper level. Unlock yourself. Well, thank you friends. Thanks for tuning in much. Love to everyone. Bye. Bye <inaudible>.