
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode is brought to you by Roca. I wear check them out at our okay a.com. They make dope shit. They make awesome sunglasses. I have been using them ever since they sent them to me that's all of the news and they make great reading glasses. They make awesome tactical glasses that I use at the gun range. They make blue blocking glasses. They're fantastic super well-engineered. They've been on the cover of outside magazine and pure mechanics and all the best gear guides for a reason. They are fucking legit insanely lightweight like forget you're wearing them lightweight Crystal Clear Optics patented technique that makes the glasses stay on your face, even when you're running or working out see they've got these titanium bendable temples that you you form fit them to the sides of your head and makes them fit perfect and they look cool all sorts of dope Styles.


You can get classic aviators. They have all kinds of other cool stuff. Miles and for whatever you're into they got them for you. They're the shit and they're not some cheap-ass glasses that trying to internet cell. There are a fucking bad-ass brand out of Austin, Texas and they've been a secret a little bit of a secret with top-level athletes and Military guys for a while, but now that the word is getting out they make these things for Olympic gold medalist Navy Seals of a bunch of people. I know my good buddy Adam Green Tree Tim Kennedy who be in here soon. He wears them Dakota Meyer. They're fucking awesome. They make the best. I we're on the planet and they are fucking great. Roka is offering 20% off your first purchase. Just enter Rogan at checkout.


That's our okay a.com into Rogan at checkout to save 20% off your first purchase check them out. They are in fact the shit. We are also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app. That's right the cash app. You probably already know the cash have is the easiest way to send money, but you and your friends. Family without having to hold on to that dirty paper that dirty paper task, but the cash have is also the best way for you to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry as stacking SATs.


You look what the fuck does that mean? Well SATs is short for Satoshi. Who is this legendary person who created bitcoin? No one knows who it is. But you know, there's a lot of guessing you can Google that. But what what's important is Bitcoin Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority. Wouldn't it be awesome if the whole world ran that way? It would be right? Well, you can start with Bitcoin and of course when you download the cash app enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word you will receive Dollars and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Brens fight for the Forgotten charity and through this promotion.


We are honored and proud to be a part of it. They've raised shitloads of money and built several wells in the process of building several more. It's Justin bran is literally one of the nicest human being has ever lived and his program to build Wells for the pygmies is just it's an amazing thing. So don't forget use the promo code Joe Rogan all one word when you download the cash app from the App Store. Or or the Google Play store today you get hooked up with 10 bucks and 10 bucks goes to an incredible cause we're also brought to you by whoop. I wear a whoop Fitness tracker 24/7 is the best fitness tracker I've ever used I fucking love it. I love so many things about this thing. First of all, I love that.


It tells me how well I recovered when I wake up in the morning. It has a sleep coach. It tells you how much sleep you're going to need based on how your body is performing and how hard you've worked out to fully. Recover it gives you a mountain of data. It tracks your heart rate all day long and it works off of your resting heart rate and your heart rate variability and all that information goes through this algorithm and it gives you real actionable data that you can use to improve the quality of your day and improve the quality of your exercise. Make sure that you push hard enough or make sure you take some time off if you're like a little worn out.


I love this. Strain coach it gives you an optimal Target exertion goal for workouts or activities based on what your body is signaling. It can handle no more guesswork anymore. So if you're still training at home, it is the perfect feature to use and based on how strenuous your day is again. The app will tell you how much sleep you should be getting so you can wake up and be recovered based on your performance goals, which you can set I fucking love it. I love the information that gives me I love that. It keeps me on track and keeps me honest. And listen to his podcast can get hooked up. Whoop is going to give you 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout. Go to whoop. That's wh oop.com enter Rogan at checkout and you will save 15% sleep better recover faster and train smarter optimize your performance with whoop, and we're also brought to you by expressvpn.


Your internet service provider can see every single site you've ever visited. And what yeah, you didn't even know that even if you use incognito mode, even if you clear your history, well whether your provider is Comcast Verizon whatever in the u.s. They can legally sell your data to add companies. I know that sounds fucking crazy. Well, what's the solution expressvpn is an app that reroutes and encrypts your internet connection through their secure servers. So your internet provider can't see the side. You visit. Which is very important it protects 100% of your data with the Best in Class encryption.


It runs seamlessly in the background with no lagging or buffering it's easy to use you tap one button and you're protected. It is rated the number one VPN by CNET and wired. It's available on all your devices phones computers routers. So your whole family is protected under one subscription go to expressvpn. And.com Rogan and you can get extra three months for free with a one-year package. That's expr ESS VPN.com Rogan go there and you will get an extra three months free on a one-year package protect yourself protect your privacy expressvpn.com Rogan.


My guest today is the king of Texas. One of the baddest motherfuckers had ever told jokes one of the Reasons that I was convinced to move here to Texas and move here to Austin because he lives here and he's awesome. Please give it up for my friend the Great and Powerful Ron White. The Joe Rogan Experience trained by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Good. Thank you did it you you look like you're well rested like the covid lockdown is done you well, thank you. You know I thought during this thing. I came up with a program called the dial it back a little bit program and it's like a it's that there's only six steps, but you don't get completely sober.


So it's going to be very popular. I think and the first step was Ron. Why don't you quit drinking so fucking much. And what is so fucking much like what's the numbers, you know half a bottle of tequila a night or something like that, maybe a little more. Wound back to a third by the way, these little cigars are the shit. These are really good Romeo giulietta tiny cigar. Yeah. That's the mini cigar EO so there's one that's a little bit bigger than that and it's called a singular you oh, and these are the minis and I started like of saying it when I was playing golf, you know that just whenever it's time for me to hit.


I just throw it away. I'll add another one, you know, there's 20 of them for 15 bucks. So, you know as a supposed of $15 ago. Our which is what I usually smoke something like that and but it's good tobacco. Yeah, it's really good. It's the same thing. It's in their big old premium cigars just wrote about rolled by the junior rollers. That's how they learn and you look like you're smoking a blunt, but we're clearly not clearly and in Austin we were saying about the rules. It's like a cool you could have as much as a quarter of a pound before they arrest you. Yeah, of course. The pound is that right? Yeah, and if you just say, it's CBD cdb, whatever nugs then they would have to test it and they don't want to test it.


They got other things to do. So they have CBD stores out here folks. It's very strange. They have stores that sell CBD joints, but marijuana's illegal, right? So, I don't know, you know, my son is in their business and it is confusing the I think that's what helps you know, yeah is the they got dizzy trying to figure it out. But I was going through LAX on the way out here week early and because we set this up for we were talking on Friday. And you said next Tuesday the 8th. Well, I don't even know what month it is much less what day of the month it is. And so I just thought it's the next Tuesday coming up which was only three days away and I was a little mad at you and I was like going wow, it seems like you to give him more than three days notice.


Has and I got to find a way to get to La and I'm looking at flights. There's nothing good. I'm thinking about bringing my plane down which it turns out has a problem so we couldn't bring it down and and and I get down here and he's like the eighth is a week from today. That's like Adam so stupid man. We made it work. Yeah, we met at work. So they just plugged in the stuff in a few days early and here I am so you're not from here, but you've been Here for how long though it two years how long you I've had. You know, I started coming to Austin when I was 15 years old my buddy his brother taught economics at UT and had a house on Fourth Street, which at that time was just little bitty low-end crackerbox houses, but they'd mostly teachers lived in and he would let us stay in his yard.


And so we would tell my parents that we were going camping at link Sutherland and my buddy Ricky Bellows when he turned 16 had the littlest new Honda, but he had one that was wrecked and he rebuilt it and we put all our camping gear and come straight to us and set up in my brother's got my buddy. I'm making McMillan his brother Scott McMillan. We'd set up in his yard his backyard and we'd walk two blocks the Sixth Street and it was probably 71 or 72 and Austin was tripping balls. I mean it was people on unicycles in clown suits juggling backwards music pumping out.


Every window Stevie Ray Vaughan coming out of this with Stevie Ray Vaughan on one end of the guitar and we're Yvonne playing live right just out the window now we didn't have any money and we couldn't get in any club. So we had we were completely broke and but we were standing there listening to this music watching this scene of Sixth Street and 71. I guess it was about seventy one or two when I've been 1571 and and even then there were people going it's over. You should have seen it in 67. I'm like still still still looks pretty good to me, man. Some people always do though. Oh, yeah that I missed it man.


Just the other day. Somebody was like, oh, yeah, it's just not what it used to be and I'm like, when did you get here like Thursday? I'm like fuck dude. Really? It's taking a dive since Thursday. All these fucking Californians moving in. Yeah, they really hate that shit. Yeah. I talked to this guys doing it workers like we're being invaded, right? Works. Well, you know, it's a get it it's a great state and but it's it's just a liberal stronghold in the middle of a very Republican state and you know was born and raised here and you know with the people ask me if I'm a Texan. I tell him I'm a Texan, you know, this is where I'm from and and the state is slowly changing and becoming more palatable for everybody and but they're still pretty hard.


Right-wing, you know faction that runs it all out of out of Dallas where all the money is in Houston. And that's what keeps it from going haywire. Right? Right. That's what keeps it from going straight Portland, right? Yeah. That's that's it. You fucking idiot that man there those people who dick ulis you need that you need. You need Law and Order you do. I don't know. I don't give a fuck with anybody's yeah. That's where my old joke was if you come to Texas and kill somebody we will kill you back to go somewhere else and kill people. You'll be better off getting gallic go to California. You know, it's just I just feel like, you know, people want to throw away everything that's there. They would just want to break it all down a deconstruct society, but they don't really mean their plan.


Once they do that. Look at you saw what happened with that six-block chunk of Seattle that they took over core as yeah, it deteriorated almost instantly became a terribly Run Country the right they had borders. They had people beating people up for Film and things I mean they had murders that they can about walls. They took over to not only that the appropriated all the buildings. They didn't build those buildings. They just took it over the problem with that kind of thinking is even if you think you're right you what you're doing now, someone can do that to you because you've already shown that it can be done. You've already shown that you could just by force you can light the fucking mayor of Portland's apartment building on fire and stand out and chant what they could do that to your house too, right?


You got to understand like what you're doing is not Nice, it's not civilized. It's not polite. This is a civilized society. And if you decide you're going to do things that are not civilized and you're going to justify people can do things that are not civilized to you. Like the founding fathers is crazy. It is in the Seventeen hundreds figure that shit out in advance. They had a whole series of checks and balances to keep things from going sideways. They really had some good ideas. It's really amazing when you stop and think about their great insight into human nature and how it can apply and where it might go, right. They were right they were right. Yeah, you know when we were having protests and vandalism and whatever in Beverly Hills and they were saying that the next You know, they're coming to tear you apart Town apart.


Yeah, I really didn't think they would but I still had a retired Navy SEAL standing in front of my house with a gun and his message was why don't you go fuck up the house next door to run and and leave Ron's Place alone. Of course, just these young people who with his idealistic ideas about people that are successful that somehow know that you've stolen it from other people and they need to give it back to everyone else. We needed to have a communist Society. Like how right where's the money coming from? Where it who's going to work? What are you going to do? Have you thought this through right, you know, I'd always chosen the path of least resistance in my life and it just ended up here, you know in Joe Rogan Studio.


It's 63 years old. This is the path of least resistance. This is where I ended up it is but it isn't, you know, you say that but you you were a grinder you were out there on the road doing the hard gigs. That's not lethal. Least resistance now it was yeah, I was so much fun. I couldn't stand it. You know, I would tap my foot when I was at home. I wanted to get back out to the path of least resistance because you know me, I love stand-up comedy and I love being on stage like you do and and and touring never bothered me, you know, it got softer and softer. It started out. It was 800 miles in a Nissan truck with a bench vinyl seat that would bend you over the steering wheel after.


See miles and you had 800 miles to go to Atlanta that who shows and I didn't care. You know, I felt like I found it. Yeah, and and I didn't even know what it was till I found it. The first time I was on stage. I was like, oh, I'm a comedian. That's what I am if you just look at most of sight at least I did when I looked at most to society most of what people were doing. So unappealing to me. It just didn't resonate with my mind the way I grew up. It just didn't work. But as soon as I started doing comedy, Comedy going on the road. I was like, oh my God, I found this thing. Yeah. I found a thing that just works It just fits into my DNA. It just it just makes sense. That's the same with me and I never ever thought that my career would get as big as it did ever.


It's high and about divorce else. You've been fucked over and I said if I could just go back in time when you were broke, and I said Ron in the year 2020 you will have been fucked out of millions of dollars in divorce. Yeah. And you'll be like well fuck man, how much should I make gotta get all that money coming from do I have any left after this? How am I doing? So yeah, it was it was two women and and all together with lawyers and all in for ten probably 10 million bucks and whoo, ouch and after tax money, you know, that's 20 million in real-world dollars.


It's something like that. Well, you know if You're if you're making dollars at the box office, you know, you're you're really only putting about 28 cents out of every dollar in a bank account that you can spend and you got a big chunk going to taxes and managers and agents and travel and all that stuff and you're trying to have fun and try to have a good time. Hey, you don't squirreling money away for divorce. Well, it turns out it was I thought it was retirement. But now it turns out you know, I really I really believe that I'm retired I believe. Done really you done with stand up. I think so. Listen, man. We're going to open up a club here in Austin. I'll do that.


I dragged you in you're gonna Crush you gonna get that the feeling down to your toes that tangle. Whoo. I haven't even thought about asset and a half a year, you know, they they tapped on my bus and the parking lot of a venue in Springfield, Illinois, and the parking lot was half-full, you know, I'd flown out from Well a got on my tour bus and and st. Louis my cruise with me crowd showing out. They knock on the door and said it's over. Wow, the government just the governor just pulled the plug on this date and then they plugged it on the next day and I'm like fuck there's not going to be any shows till May I bet and boy was I wrong it's right now.


We're in September. Yes. It is September and there's no shows in sight. Well, you can go some places Houston's And chose San Antonio's doing shows Nashville's doing shows Kansas. City's doing shows a lot of places like fuck it. Let's roll. Let's just do it. Yeah, but you know the, you know Zanies in Nashville Hughley fucking collapsed on stage there and yeah covid and yeah, the guy that ran the club got covid from him and he got it from you and yeah from you, well, he got it. So we're assuming this for me to get maybe he gave it to him. What could have gone the other way except for you Gleek. Claps and then he came up positive three days later. Whoever hughley's Road manager is props to that guy because he saw it coming.


He caught him. Yeah right show me that that guy is the floor on the fucking because if he hits the fall for man, he's got brain damage, right you fall from that view fall from a sitting position and that's a kind of a high stage. Yeah. Yeah. You've been there, right? Yeah, and he's an yeah, my manager would find out about it on the internet the next day. He wouldn't Not only would he not catch me. He wouldn't even know where I was. But it was a weird one where I did you watch the video of him deal like his words got all jumbled together like it did they didn't make sense? Yeah. I know. I didn't see it. And then was one it was it was very strange like in the crowd was like what what the fuck did he just say?


Oh, is that it? What are you doing Jim? We got a lot of fucking technical glitches. We're working out the Gremlins here. All right, that's a new studio Jamie Jones Show first. He'll show it to us. We'll get it. We'll figure it out, but it was a weird moment where he just paused and then it just started to collapse and his manager caught him right in time and they just dragged him off the stage. Well, I'd like to see the footage of that. Yeah, Wayward we were you know, I play golf when I'm there. The same courses will see we can hear it. I can't see catches them. Look at this. Right now of what else he'll bounce his head though.


It wasn't a great catch now wasn't the best catch. I like that little gray goatee thing going on like that. Yeah, if I got like it so much. I grew one. I play golf with him him and Cedric and George Lopez few months ago. I must have been a fun outing. Yeah. I was staying at this mccar Resort up in Santa Barbara and I just looked across the bar and it was hugely and Cedric sitting there and I'm like With that I recognize these guys and and I went over to started. I just heard him ordered tequila and I was like, oh, this is Kindred Spirits over here. I'm going to upgrade their order because they sold my tequila that place and so I said, I'm over some tequila and I'm like and and they threw a fit over me your Ron why Rob white I'd worked with Cedric hehe middle for me on the road.


And I knew he was going to be a star then other they're stopping this guy, you know, he's got so much talent and energy and so turn Zhou Lopez was coming up to play golf with him the next day. So we hooked up made it a foursome kill the bottle of number one extra in the a hole on the course. We passed it around on the 18th to polish it off. And and what a what a hoot, you know, what a glorious day that was just laughter and fun and I'm sure golf is awesome. It's just it that's a lot of time. It's at I don't have time for buddy. I'm time. You ain't got time for it. Dude. I don't know how you do what you do three shows a day or two or three of these a day. And then the last time you anymore, well, you know the last time I did your show I was the third one that day and you're like, yeah, I'm gonna go do my abs and then I got five sets tonight.


I'm like Jesus Christ. I'm gonna go to bed. I was drunk stoned like you're going to do what ya gotta do my abs and I'm gonna head on over there last podcast. We did we got a little lit. Yeah. We got crazy. Yeah very early. So I'm sure fucking tequila you come bringing your own tequila, which man supposed to do, right? Right, you got to drink it. You got to drink it. So you were saying you're just ended in the dakhil business. Now, you're basically not even in the comedy business anymore. You know, I actually told somebody in a conversation that I used to be a comedian I say so they said what do you do as I used to be a comic and then I kind of caught myself. I'm like well because I believe if you want to be a comedian. All you have to do is go be a comedian, but you have to do that, right you have to go to it.


You have to go do shows and all those things and then I just don't do anymore when you call someone a comic like how long they have to done it. You know before I recognize it a while, you know, what's wow, you know, I figured art that I'd say five five years. Yeah before you start to even start to understand the relationship between you and all those people out there. It's a it's a long process. I think I caught it on I caught on to doing stand up really quickly. So when I had four minutes I could kill for four minutes and then I could kill for five minutes. So I always kind of Understood how to generate the power, you know, if even from pretty early on but I still only had five minutes.


I think the worst thing that can happen to a young comic now as they come out win some contests and all the sudden they were headlining but you know, they won with 10 minutes of material and then what do you do? So that's a tough spot to be in. Yeah, it's horrible Charlie Murphy was famous and then he started doing stand-up. So he was doing stand-up as a famous person famous for being funny on the Chappelle show. Right that took balls. Yeah it and I was around Charlie during those days and it was crazy. I mean he just was learning stand up in front of sold-out crowds. Yeah, this is scary. Whoo, but I never thought any of this even though I was standing right next to Foxworthy when he exploded into one of the biggest Comics that ever lived.


I'd never thought it would happen to me. You know, I just didn't and I was okay with it. You know, I like to be in a club headliner. And that was I was still making, you know as much money as my friends or more as a club headliner and and I wasn't paying my taxes which made it seem like I made even more money their ass. I'm picking up tabs and shit, right but I never saw a big, you know, big big success ever come in my way and they just did I think the most the most fun you have is when you're just making enough money to not worry about money. Everything else gets it gets complicated.


Yeah things get complicated when they could take 10 million from you in a divorce. Yeah, right. That is well. You know what? That's the thing. I remember when when after blue-collar came out and all of a sudden when the DVD came out all the sudden that could sell out any venue in the country and two minutes at literally in the money was coming in and I was so joyous because I didn't see what else was coming behind it. Right? I just saw all the sudden I'm making money hand over fist over hand over fist and I'd wake up in the morning glad to be me, you know having wake up going. Yeah, this is great. I could go online. Look I'm a millionaire.


I have a booger this I'm a millionaire. This is the most fantastic thing ever, but I didn't see what was coming, you know, just as far as all the you know, I'm basically an idiot and and or I'm a fool and his money and you don't want to walk away from that without a big pile of it. And you know, I did it and I'm kind of getting to a place in my life. Where now I'm like, all right. I'm okay. Okay, I'm okay. I still I still got it. I mean I still gave the finances to retire comfortably and I mean not actually I was my girlfriend lives on a main Channel over on Oxnard submarine at and we were talking about getting a boat.


So I called my friend who's been offshore boat racer a billionaire and and I said I just want you know, he knows a lot about boats. He's gift. Maybe give us some direction on what kind of Would be great and so he started asking me right away on the phone call as he said House of career going man. What's going on in your life? Is it it's over man? I don't have any dates. I have nothing on the books. I don't know when it's coming back and I talked to my financial people and said let's figure that. I'm never going to make another dime. What can I keep? What can I what do I say land as in said I got to get rid of the plane and the probably the bus and he goes well, at least you don't have a boat and I was like, where's the neck?


That was my next question man. That's gonna sell the boat to get a bus and send the bus to get a boat do you but if everything comes back like if they develop a vaccine if we reach herd immunity if people start touring again, you'll be out there. Come on, man. I don't know. Come on man. I don't know what's left. Oh man. I'll bring you out there you I'll just bring you out for a guest that bring you up a little guess. I give you a little taste. You know, I feel the Roar of the crowd ladies and Gentlemen, please welcome Ron. Why would be nice? I you know, I I could tell because I always worked really hard. Right and I'm not worked really hard but I always did a lot of shows. Yeah right toward all the time.


And if I took 10 days off, I could feel it in my big set. You know, just that information is not floating as close to the top as I'd like for it to be and and then by the next said it was a little better but third said I'm fine and I haven't done a set thought about it set looked at a set list watch the tape and a half a year, and I don't know what I'm I don't know how I would even take to get it back or if it or if I could just walk back into it and you walk right back into it. I did Houston Improv come by guess about month and a half two months ago now and I listen to a bunch of sets and I did the whole weekend and the first listen to like three or four recordings made notes wrote down all my stuff.


I forgot a couple of things forgot the way the order of few taglines, but I walked out just having a great time. I had a great time first show was a little odd like wow, I can't believe I'm doing stand up again. The second show is a show by the third show. I was back. Okay, but it was just because I listen to all the recordings. I took a lot of time. What's really well over it. What venue what size being you were using Small Place The Improv? Okay, you know, I mean, I think it's eats five hundred and I think there they were at 75% capacity. Yeah, right. Really? Yeah, why are there no in the chairs? It's pretty packed. Well, we took the chairs we didn't need outside but it was a good time. It was it was fun, but then I started thinking man. What if I got it and gave it to somebody. Hey, that's my worry.


I give it to some person that has a compromised immune system. Right? Well, that's what you know, I was telling you that my girlfriend or not. I was going to move. This I bought a new car for out in La I wanted to move the car that was out there out here. So we decided to just drive it. So we stopped in Vegas and stayed at the Bellagio when I have always worked at the Mirage and I found out that outside the Mirage. I'm nobody even with the MGM Grand folks. And so it was kind of just you know a week before we got there people were going in who's got the keys to this thing man. How do you turn those lights on? All right, we fired though. People we had to get him back because we don't know how to do this.


Yeah, so it's casinos it basically shut down for months at a time and they were load everybody. Those are Monster complicated properties. And then we went to we had we did some gambling we had some decent food and no shows or anything and we're there for three days and was great play golf and and but we just stayed to ourselves and we want some money playing Blackjack and went spend it immediately on caviar and champagne and like look what we want. This is great. And we went to Sedona and Sedonas. You've been to Sedona, Arizona. It's like hippie land. Yeah, it's all crystal. It is gray field just beautiful.


It is beautiful. It's like His stunning. I mean in every direction you look at why is it attracts? So many flaky people though. They say it's because of some kind of vibe that it has energy or whatever and We're staying in this, you know, it's kind of a five-star Resort and it was down on his River with these little cabins and this beautiful River wolf. Whatever Oak Creek or whatever it is and cuts through these huge canyons and and you can take these Adirondack chairs and put them in the river and just sit in this beautiful clear running River with it and just sit out there and relax and let the world go by and breathe and it was really really nice.


And I told Jenny I said, you know what we could do because we had our we were made a last-minute reservations. So we had the littlest cab and furthest from the river but there was a little house right on the river. I don't know what they charge for it, but it was cool he shit and I said, you know what we could do. We have pool our money and just rent this place and we'll just live here forever till we're broke till it's all or there's all the money's gone. We've run up a tab we can Pay it. We just Al tell there's money coming. We've already spent Millions here. And then when the cops are wading into the river to drag us out and throw us off the property will shoot ourselves and just float dead and she was like what I'm not saying we have to I'm just saying in the neck kind of okay, we're syringe of heroin and just whatever you know that She next it.


Yeah, she's don't like those romantic ideas. Yeah, so then we went to Santa Fe then Austin and then I had my tour bus biggest 7 Austin and took his to up to Nashville and then to see my mother and in Cocoa Beach Florida. And so we had covid test before we got to mother's house to you know, make sure even though we'd been being very very safe. That did not like couldn't bear the thought of yeah often my mom. And yeah, that's the Fear man. That's the big fear. The big fear is giving it to somebody who can't handle it. Right? Right. It's it's a weird one man mean the this Society has changed in such a radical way over the last six months.


It's almost like if you I know someone who actually did get hit by a car, right right before George Floyd died. And had brain damage and came out of a coma like while the riots are going on. Like literally didn't know what was going on and has brain damage and is trying to put it all together like you ever see that movie 28 Days Later. Yeah awesome zombie movie, but the guy wakes up in the middle of a coma from a coma and the world's changed he woke up in there a virus that swept through the land some virus that they created for chimpanzees called rage and it escaped from a lab and started affecting. People turn them into these wild zombie creatures, right?


But you know, it's almost like that like this person that I know woke up from this from getting hit by a car flown through the air landed on their head got all fucked up in a coma for 10 days hospitalized and then coming out of it watching the news going what the fuck is happening, right? This cop cars on fire streets of burning. People wearing masks everyone's wearing a mask and and not wearing masks. You know, I was stopped so protective of my mom, but she wants to get out she wants to go to the grocery store. She wants to go, you know, but she's just been locked up. So she she she she also cooks for me.


You know, she my mother loves to cook for me and and it was almost like Breaking Bad when they chained that guy to the meth lab. That's what my mother looked like in the kitchen, you know acting fried chicken and fried shrimp and gumbo and The things I love and but we went to the store and you know, she likes to she doesn't walk that stable. But so she likes to walk with them, you know with his cart and so we went and European when I wearing masks. I just wanted to fucking cuss him out, you know, and you know, so that that is so they get to walk around with no mask. I got to keep my mother and I'm storage facility, you know, so she didn't catch this disease. And so I'd like for everybody to catch on with the mass thing, you know, and Just let's let's get through this.


Yeah, I think most people have caught on with it. Now don't you think most people are wearing masks? It's pretty rare that people aren't wearing masks. Especially run. It'll folks it's become I think a little bit better in it and we're you know, we're getting some better numbers right now. So that's good. Yeah, that's a I hope you taking your vitamin D. No. Okay. Well, you got to take vitamin D. It's very important. There was an article that was just published recently the I put on my Twitter page that I don't read your Twitter page. Don't have to but I'll send you the things correctly that are important. All right, but this was talking about vitamin C and people that get covid and wind up in the ICU and vitamin vitamin D rather vitamin D seems to be the biggest factor that people one of the things that dr.


Rhonda Patrick talked about on the podcast. Who is it more than 80% of the people in the ICU are deficient in vitamin D and only 4% had sufficient levels of vitamin D the vitamin D has a significant impact on your immune system and most people don't get you probably get a good amount because you're out in the sun Golf and a lot but probably not quite enough there and you should almost always supplement. Yeah, my you know, my doctor said so far just had all of my tests on the other day and he said that you need to buck boost your vitamin D. That's what he said. Everybody does. Yeah, right humans aren't supposed to live in this little fucking red spaceship. We're supposed to be outside in the world. Yeah. I mean, this is how we evolve we evolved to be outside all the time, but didn't evolve to be Indoor creatures so our bodies are designed to absorb vitamin D from the Sun.


I mean that's that's how we create vitamin D in our body, right? And I think you're right. I do I do spend an awful lot of time outside so that but I you know, I need to get on a program. That's for sure. You know you willing I'll put you on a program. I'm willing. I'm willing to see how to program. Yeah. Now do you take a dump ton of vitamins a lot of shit, even though the end you believe it? All good. It didn't really I feel great you have more energy than anybody. I know do you sleep at all I do that's one of the reasons why of energy I sleep a lot a little amount of sleep for me at six hours. That's a little amount like that's like a I gotta catch up a good night. I'm sleeping eight.


Maybe even 9. Yeah, I slee sleep good. It's important. Yeah, I think that's everything that's hot. You know, that's that's what I want from you. You know, I'd love to have Joe Rogan energy instead of Ron White. Energy, which is man. Let's take a nap. Yes, that's tequila son. No. No, that's that's salvation. That's for something that salvation. All right, crack it open. I was gonna I was gonna make this deal that did for sure I didn't drink for the first hour. I think we're about 40 minutes. Okay, that's close. Yeah close 30 minutes because I went 28 you made yourself a deal.


That's a hilarious Yeah, see if you drink this every day, you're not going to have a lot of energy, but you will have an interesting energy while you're drinking it. You know, it's the training is it's a stimulant and I don't know told you that before said of a depressant cheers Joe Rogan is my brother. Congratulations to both of us. Thank you for everything for everything. Whoo. Well, you got me. Yeah, I'm stalking your bar at your house. So I brought a bouquet tequila on the phone with some good ideas with this stuff. This stuff will bring me to the strange places it will adore.


I was also going to bring some shrooms, but I decided not to are you still micro dosing you know it that it stopped working now we didn't stop working at the guy was getting it from went to prison and So for mushrooms, I don't know. What are the odds. Yeah, right. I don't know. Yeah, I think that's exactly what happened. The fuck is putting someone in jail for mushrooms. I got you go to jail. Yeah, it's you know, he was a door guy in a club and but he was really doing it because you know, you do a lot of vets that had, you know, PTSD and they and people were feeling like hallucinogens were, you know, making a connection for some of these guys and particularly micro dosing Yeah microdose, and that's what that's what I was doing.


Unless there was a concert to go to and then I was Mac. So dosing. Well I ran into you at The Green Room of The Comedy Store and you're like I found this thing that's fucking amazing. I'm just microdose. Mm. Yeah, I guess I'm on medication. What's a little sparkling? Yeah day. And and so I you know, I still described it as wonderful one like oh how you feeling. It's wonderful. It's wonderful take the drugs and go to the concert, you know have fun, you know, it's getting A lazy as a micro dosing is it's like it's just enough to feel it. Right. It's just like you just just enough to feel it. You just just enough to take the edge off a life. Yes, but you're very they're very coherent.


Yeah even more probably. Yeah. Well, they see see things better. There was a studies done on visual Acuity one of these psychedelic researchers. They did these things that people will they give them low doses of psilocybin and they were able to detect movement quicker than people without it. Like so they have two lines two parallel lines. And when one of the lines would diverge off of parallel the people that mushrooms could recognize it much quicker and the people not on mushrooms. Yeah, one of my earliest mushroom experiences, maybe the first we had we had heard about it the course I was in Houston. So mushrooms were at the end of every street because it's all developed ranchland the further out you go. So at the end of it there is there's a pastor and that's full of mushrooms.


Right? I had no idea had they had value anywhere because they were just so readily Available and when we boiled some up and me and Joe pain and and we drank them but we didn't know how long it took to for it to hit and Joe had to leave and I'm sitting there my dad comes home. I was staying with him and and I feel that these mushrooms coming on a little bit and then there was this horrible wreck in Houston where this big truck with some kind of gas flipped on one of those big overpasses and they add cameras out there and I started laughing so hard it was funniest thing I ever seen and and I couldn't stop myself from laughing at it and it wasn't funny at all.


And it but it just the laughter was in my new my dad. I remember him just looking at me going what's wrong with him. And so I left and I was driving my car and I noticed that I could see an eye of a bird. That was 50 yards away. While I was running into the back of another car, so I'm I can't really I can't really verify that everything but the birds I was looking at it and all the sudden cut tonic and it not very hard but it was definitely a wreck. Yeah, it makes you see things makes it here things makes you a hero. Yeah speaking of here.


Hmm comes and goes we got some Gremlins spaceship noises work space ships. They look in place here. Yeah, we're working this place out trying to figure it out. I like it though. I think it's it. You know, whenever you're in a new spot, you got to get accustomed to it still feels weird. Like we did one with Adam Curry just felt weird. It feels weird to be here. Yeah already used to it. Yeah. I'm used to I'm used to Austin tell you that I got used to it quick I'm settled in. I love it like it a lot. I love the less people. I love how friendly everybody is. There's a lot of good things about this place. I love the barbecue. I had diarrhea for four days in a row couldn't stop really I was eating his fucking barbecue.


I had like a piece of lettuce and four days all ribs ribs and sauce like Jesus. Where are they coming from where you got to go to place for you? Oh, man. I was going everywhere. I found this hole-in-the-wall be cave barbecue. Holy shit. It's like a trailer like this little trailer that you pull up to fucking phenomenal, you know, they're all born out of this nominal this, you know, these are all certs, you know, early German settlements through New Braunfels and they just understood smokehouses. And that what it is where it all came from. Wow, it all came from Germany. Yeah. No kidding. Wow. Well, I know there's a lot of German folks that live in Fredericksburg right like out there.


Oh and interview Bravo's and what South in the Where's your aunt lived and they live in New Braunfels? What's but anyway, that's where that that was. All German settlements. Mm-hmm. We used to go camping. We'd go to the Guadalupe River which is a fun fun thing to do and we stayed at a campground called The Lazy L&L and it that which used to be a farm for this German family and the guy that owned it figured out he could turn it into a campground and make easy easier money. So he did he was about 90 years old and he Smelled horrible just really stunk. Always always wearing the same clothes those guys.


Yeah, we're pussy fuck it fuck showers. I thought you were gonna take a shower of or and but he told me he wanted to show me something so they're old barns were there and stuff and he took me over and he showed me a plow that had a seed on it and he said that when he saw that he was he said that he thought everything that could be invented. Had been invented now, you're sitting on a plow or you fucking kidding me. Even the good life live it goddamn. The horse is dragging you and the plow good you're not doing anything. Your boots aren't getting muddy. Not a good job of it. You're good. You're above at grabbing their life living that silver star life.


That's a it's a weird thing that the immigrants came out here learning how to smoke meat like German smoked meat and smoked sausages and they somehow know that morphed. At into barbecue it was everybody that worked for that one of those people they went started their own place, but they learned how to do it and just kind of spread from that and you can't have bad barbecue here. You will not survive. No no, no, no, no will not survive. I found that out everybody get up make any money selling shitty barbecue and the Texas Hill Country and you cannot it's not happening. Everything's good. Yeah, the real worried like I was saying is that people like me? Come here and fuck it up.


How could you fuck I'm not gonna fuck it up. I'm gonna find nice Texas people who say tell me how to vote. I'll vote for your way. I want to keep your thing going whatever you did to get this like I want to keep this going and nothing to do with politics. The politics could fuck it up though. Not the barbecue. No nothing, but they could fuck up some of the aspects of this place like yeah Freedom parts, right? Yeah, the thing the thing about having a place like this is you got to kind of let people do like one of the things that I love about Texas is the fact that it's so wild that you could do a lot of shit here. You can do crazy like I looked at a ranch and I said what if I wanted to put a comedy club on this Ranch, is there any rules that go no, no, go ahead.


They will have got it I go. What about a shooting range though? It's okay. Of course fine. Yeah, bring it. I do whatever the fuck you want put a fence around shoot every animal you have yeah, I don't care. Yes, its freedom it is it is its freedom. Yeah. I enjoy you know, I'm socially pretty liberal but physically pretty conservative and yeah me 10. So I and I you know, I I just lean that way and so I hope to Texas, you know cleans that way too. You know, I don't know that it ever will but you know, I love the the freedom of Texas and and I love calling myself a Texan, you know, it was a Sovereign Nation at one time.


We could fly our flag as high as the US flag. No other state can because they weren't real Nation. That's true. You could fly the Texas flag and it's the only the only flag. Yep. Do you know why this place is so crazy. Do you know the whole history of why it's so different than anywhere else why Austin or Texas is Texas in general because it was its own country because the Comanches the Comanche. That's really what it is. Okay, we had all right, let's hear it. Yeah, we had a fight off the Comanches the Comanches they were mean were the baddest motherfuckers in the planes and they literally ran the western part of this country. Sure. They were the most Savage they all they ate was Meet they lived off of like buffalo meat.


Basically, they learned how to ride horseback better than any other Indians they learned how and they call themselves Indian does the thing like Native American versus Indian. I've talked to them. They prefer the term indian. I know I don't know if that Applies to all of them but the ones that I've talked to and I've been trying to educate myself about this shit. They said we prefer the term Indians by getting the American people or the settlers called him into. Yeah. I thought we were in they were in India the original people in the 1400 thought they were in India. Yeah, but for whatever reason it stuck and but the Comanches they were when the the Texas Rangers were the first guys to figure out how to beat the Comanches. So Mexico was allowing people to move in to Texas and Oklahoma back of the day when the settlers are like go ahead my friend go ahead.


It's free and they were basically using settlers as a buffer for the Comanches because everybody who moved into these places and build houses got slaughtered, right? And so when the but it was Ranger Mexico Mexico until win. Yes until what year I don't remember what year but they figured out the Texas Rangers of the first guys who figured out how to fight the Comanche and they what they did is they basically fought like them the early settlers used to get off of their horses, too. I shoot so they get off their horses with a fucking musket and the Comanches would run on them and they could shoot five six arrows and six seconds from imported. They would just jump boom. Boom filling them up with arrows and these poor bastards had the musket with the stick and the powder and they got fucked so cult figured out how to make a revolver and the first revolver was made like somewhere and like the 1840s and one of the very first people that use the revolver was the Texas Rangers was Jack Hayes.


Jack Hayes was the original Texas Ranger and this bad motherfucker figured out how to live like Comanche fight off a horse back 99% Sure. That's his name Jack Hayes Google that real quick. But we have a we actually made a large photo of this dude. That's going to hang in the front lobby. Oh cool. Yeah. There he is. John Hayes. Well, they call him. Jack to right. Isn't that weird? That Jack is a nickname for John. Yeah. Well, I don't have Kennedy is Jack Kennedy. That doesn't make any sense. How did Fuck did that happen Jack Hayes. Yeah, John Coffey. Jack Hayes 30 was an American Military Officers. Also that dude. He's there's a large metal photo that's being made of him.


He's a reason why Texas exist because these these motherfuckers figured out how to fight the Comanches they figured out how to do it and partly because of cult and because of the revolver and the revolver was basically this saw comes from a book. That's an amazing book that I read called Empire of the summer Moon. This guy Sam Gwen SG Gwen and it's all about the Comanches and how difficult it was for the settlers to make it across Texas. So Texas became as fiercely independent Place partially in part because of their battles with the Comanches who ran through Austin, is there a you can find Comanche arrowheads in Austin, I still to this day I friends who've found them here, right?


I have friends that look for him all the time, but going by far. Were these one of them he goes on these arrowheads searches all over the place and where they find them for the most is those Buffalo jumps, you know those places where the Comanche would force Buffalo off cliffs that didn't even know that is how Wild it is they would force so many of off of cliffs that they would rot in a pile because they couldn't eat all of them. They would rot in a pile and it would be so much bacteria and rot that they would spontaneously combust. So most of these Buffalo jumps like when you would find at the bottom of the they'd be charged. Like charred Cliffside because the piles of Buffalo would would literally burst and burst into flames.


How do you know all this stuff Joe still got a week? I smoke weed I get into things. That's why I can't play golf. I know you don't have time for go. Well. I can't play golf because I'd get obsessed. Yeah, it would that's the problem with you know, I know that it like Jiu-Jitsu or whatever it is, you know, and I would get obsessed. Yeah. I know I would I Tony Hinchcliffe is obsessed now. That poor bastard. He's hooked plays golf every day since he pictures. Oh, he's telling me I just played golf with her just had a conversation with a guy named Pete that we all know that oh, yeah, and and he had just played golf that morning with Hinchcliffe and he said he's horrible, but he's so into it that it doesn't even matter.


That's how he is with pool. And Hinchcliffe is horrible a lot of things that he's really into. Yeah, he's I think he's he's really funny though. Oh, yeah, they're all the comic. He's one of the best up-and-coming comics in America and I think no it's not he came with me that Houston when we did that gig. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, he's fucking hilarious. He's talking about moving Austin. He's kind of young I'm dragging them all here right away. He said there's going to be no place of do stand-up and I'm like, no there is there is Joe's going to open a club and I'm gonna open up a club a hundred percent. That's the plan. There's a long-term plan. There's a ranch in a club in those wrong long-term plan is the in the club's going to be on the ranch. I don't know yet. How is decided yet?


Oh, oh, you gotta have a club where people can go to it. Yeah, they getting a car go to the ranch. No. No, I gotta be able to you might be wrong. I could not be wrong about this. You might be wrong location location location. I'm about that not barbecue and comedy yet. Not just barbecue in comedy. I mean like outdoor festivals. I want to put an Amphitheatre and do cotton charity concerts. Oh, wow, like legitimately. Yeah. I think it all can be done promoted on the podcast, but you just have it for good for good will All the money goes to charity. I forget about your platform and how many people it reaches. I know the first time I did your podcast. I had no idea how big it was.


You just asked me to come do and I was driving down there going. I can't believe I said I would do this and I didn't know idea and then I fucking hit a curb while I was pulling in and busted a tire. I'm like God damn it. And then it turns out he was the biggest thing I've ever done in my career was your podcast more people saw that than anything and I got More people coming up to me. I saw you on Roga. Sorry on Rogan. I'm sorry on Rogan. I'm like God damn how many of you are watching this fucking thing. I remember you grab me the comic store afterward you I had no fucking idea. No idea. No idea. Nobody told me, you know, you didn't tell me you just I just knew you had a podcast and it turned out, you know turned out to be a hell of a gig but the thing is it seems like it's not right because it's just you and me here hanging out, you know, it seems like it seems Seems like it's just us.


Yeah right shoes. That we would do for the back bar The Comedy Store exactly the same thing and that's why when I watch it, you know, I watched one the other day with you and Whitney Cummings and Annie Lederman. Yeah, and that was really good girls are awesome. Oh, they were so funny. This girl is so funny that I tell you about about Whitney's Pig. Yes, drove it all the way to Texas to a fucking pig sanctuary and I made it. Did you meet it you got pictures. To the pig Sanctuary. So what happened was we were going to do was talking to James McGraw and we were thinking about doing James move down here, huh?


Jase moving down the I know you know, I don't believe it. You already bought a house. Oh, he didn't tell me that I got a house on. Oh, no, we did tell me that. I'm Travis, right? Yeah, so why we're bringing them all out here. All right. Come on. I'm on bang the drums put up the bat signal. Yeah. I told somebody the other day there. It's a why is that why is Rogan moving out here? And I said well because I moved out here and you started crying. What am I going to do is outrun white. I'm like just come on out here Joe and it'll be great. Well, you did say that you did say that and I wiped a tear from your eye with a little tissue and then you just use that bandana. You have wrapped around your neck, right just a just a dry your tears and tell you there's hope for your future.


Yeah, but you were talking about in glowing terms and that's not a small part of why I'm here this several people that talked about in such glowing terms. And when the Looting hit that was the big wake-up call for me. I was like, okay, I see what's going on here, you know, either can have, you know armed guards everywhere which already had, you know at the studio or and but felt weird felt on La feels unmanageable. It feels like it's out of control that get Garcetti guys not handling it. Well, no, I don't think so. Now it's a fucking disaster and there's Tents now that I've ever seen in any REI convention everywhere you go. Everyone's camping, you know, it's like the streets are filled with people that got evicted from their houses lost their jobs or don't have any money for anything and it's just it's just way too many folks way too many folks and not enough people work and it just seems dangerous.


All right. Well, it's the climate so good that if I was going to be, you know, if I had no home, I would want to live in Southern California and be homeless there you guys are having made his mobile home dudes the drive around those shitty mobile houses, right? This is mean basically park it and there's your house when you got a roof you got a killer make you more than you move and park it there. Yeah, but I mean, they're not they're not even making people move that much anymore after covid everything after this whole George Floyd thing in the attacks on the police officers like this very few things their enforcement. They used to enforce these to kick the where our old Studio was these to kick them off the streets. This is not let him park on the street and how they're all over the streets and you'll go And one of the side streets in the valley and you'll see 15 only get Van Nuys area.


You'll see like 15 of them in a row 20 in a row. There's basically Villages of people that are living out of their mobile homes. And most of them did barely can drive, you know is a lot of rashes all fucked up, right? We thought someone was shooting in front of our house. We talk guns were going out and in front of the studio rather and the security guys go out there and it's just one of those guys trying to start up his truck backfires. And bang bang bang me really loud. Like we were like oh shit. It's going down right out front. But no just a dude trying to move. Yeah. Yeah. I figure when I needed to felt like I needed to hire an armed guard to protect my home there which turned out I you know wouldn't probably didn't yeah, probably didn't matter but I was that worried about it, you know just did that.


I am going to go ahead and put somebody up there, you know, and I felt You know, I thought about doing that but because I figure somebody paid me to guard their house once people started coming at me. I would just find another job right? I would move on down the road and do something else for a living need more than one guy, right? Well there were actually two because my manager lives on that street to so he had one and I had one and but they never got any. Oh, it's pretty high up there. So they just never got that high, you know, it was down in the flats. There were some problems thing is once things start happening and you you didn't start it, but you're doing it like you're like looting like it's it takes a lot to get people smashes get someone to smash a window run into into a store and steal things it takes a lot but once someone smashed the window and there's three people in there stealin things.


It's not that hard to run in there, right? That's what the problem with mob mentality is. Once things start happening. Is he get this Blood had momentum going that's can't fucking stop it. Yeah, it's very hard to stop and The Genies out of the bottle like it is in La when they when they let those cop cars on fire and smash all those treats on Melrose and all the way down Hollywood Boulevard and just robbed all those stores. I was like, you're not doing anything about this. There's no no cops are stopping us. You gonna let them did this strategy was to let them burn themselves out, right Michael. You've just set a precedent that great and it's going to take years to turn this fucking Battleship Road immunity. Yeah kind of what they were going for their eventually. It'll all be okay.


Yeah. I wish you know, I was Shocked I've been I've been in a State of Shock, you know, and and somewhat depressed about the state of the nation, you know, and the world that we live in and how what's the answer to all this, you know, is there an answer to all this and and it is affected me emotionally and and not just certainly not because of what's happened to me. It's just my fear of what's happening to everybody else because I know I'm okay, right and In a in a in a great a great position to weather the storm. That's one of the reasons why you're okay. The people the real danger is when the economic situation deteriorates into a place where it's unmanageable and that that's how it is for a lot of people a lot of those people that are looting and robbing stores like AOC something said something ridiculous, like maybe those people just stealing some bread to feed their families like probably not but the reason why they're doing it is because they're broke.


That's there's no rich people out there looting not you know their looting because they're desperate and because covid in the lockdown as put people into this unmanageable situation where they really don't have any light at the end of the tunnel. They don't know what to do. That's dangerous. And so that's where you realize how much economic Prosperity is attached to a civilized society if everybody's doing well, everybody's fine. But as soon as people aren't doing well, right more is more danger. It is more crime. There's more you know, and Don't know how that turns around when all these businesses go under and then people have willing to start new businesses know like how much government not just a number of restaurants that we lost in Austen that will never come back and small but not just restaurants.


That's the one I feel because I go out to eat every meal. But but I know that these mom and pop shops were not prepared for this and in any way shape or form and they hung on for a minute and they're gone. Yeah, and and will they ever come back and you know what? God you know you hope so. Yeah, but you wonder how you know, you wonder how well Austin at least the letting these people stay open with limited capacity and you know make people wear masks in La you can't do anything. I mean Allah is the one place in the whole country where you can't open a beauty salon. You can't these all these hairdressers in barbershops are fucked right but they've been closed for six months.


You see that Nancy Pelosi shit. Did you see that affected how fucking crazy is that lady? She She without a map without wearing a mask and you want to talk about a hypocrite. The fucking all the beauty salons are locked down. She went into the beauty salon with no mask wandering around got a blowout when no one else could even go to the beauty salon. They caught her on security camera, they uploaded it. And you know what? She said. It's a setup. She said it was a setup. All right, like they set her up. Like, you know the fucking I don't even have any hair and I know you can't go to a beauty salon. I mean the plan to you Joe really literally doesn't apply.


At all and I know the fucking rules. She's a speaker the house you tell me you don't know the rules in your District in San Francisco. You don't know the rules because you know the rules course you do. It's so slippery that lady handed Trump a drag gift. Yeah. It was almost like when when Hillary called the supporters of black basket of deplorable isn't like you just yeah handed a man that had a baton a bat to hit you with and not a regular one do but the ones with the barbed wire wrap. Around like dude had to go bloody weapon dead and the minute I heard that I was like, yeah, I thought you're supposed to be smart. He's not smart. She is the politician she just greasy.


They just been doing it long enough. So they know the moves to do in the right steps like yeah, they're all gross. It's there's no getting around it. You can't you can't survive in that business. If you're if you're not gross right you just that's how you get there. That's how you stay there and they they feed off of the fact that they have control. They feed off of the fact they have power over other people. They have more power than anyone else. And that's one of the reasons why she would do something like that. You tell me she can't get someone to come to her house from where I'm asking give her a blowout. She's worth a hundred million dollars. Of course. She can do that, right but she's like, yeah, I'm gonna white gradient man. They gonna do it for me. I'm not gonna wear masks right? I've never wash my own hair just gonna stroll right in there.


Like she owns The Joint it's just like when you see politicians being hypocritical like that lady in Chicago the mayor of Ah go she's like, you know talking up these people in these peaceful protest and everything's fine. But then they tried protesting on her blog. She set up fucking armed guards. She said made a mandate you can tomorrow mandate. She just said you can't protest on her street, right? I have a right to protect my own safety like this. That's what everybody's trying to do. Right? That's what we're into. That's what we're doing in here doing but that's what people feel when they get into a position of power. That's the problem with power. That's the With whether it's Garcetti or new summer anybody dictating any of these rules when someone gets into a position of power.


It's fucking intoxicating ability to tell people you can't work right shut it down, you know start it up shut it down it's intoxicating and once you have some power boy, it's very difficult to give that power up. I anticipate that even if they figure out a real cure for Coronavirus, I anticipate lockdowns now for flu, I think there's going to be locked down for all sorts of of diseases that kill a certain amount of people you could you could you might be my might be wrong, but you could see it happening. You could see it happening because they've set a precedent for them having the ability to dictate whether or not people work and whether or not people are allowed to move freely and do whatever they want because that's what happens when people have power it's a fucking dangerous intoxicant.


Yep. I will well, I believe you're right about that that it's a it's a it's dizzy. Sexy power is and how sexy you feel when you have it and that but I don't think you know, I think we find a I think we find a vaccine we move on or the aliens land. I've been thinking the aliens are coming, you know, I was talking to a buddy of mine the other day another billionaire got a few billionaire buddies and you move I don't really think I'm sucking up tilt for a reason they'll tell you in advance with what About to happen well and well this one this guy particular guy is really really really smart and he has no doubt in his mind whatsoever that aliens are dancing among us and I think he's right passing the little baby cigars Ron White.


I love those things that wine. What are the dark one of the different colors? Well, there's this one. Oh, that's not a cigar. I know what the fuck that That's a CD B. Oh, yeah, we're talking about earlier. Give me some of that light sure. Yeah. I'm convinced. 100% convinced I used to be 60% Ed you're up to a hundred. Yeah, I talk to Commander favor a favor of my life. I could do 75 push-ups and I'm down to three. All right back up 75. I'll show you how all right you got nothing else to do.


I've talked to people that have seen them I talk to this one guy who was a pilot in the is he Air Force and Navy Navy pilot. I believe Commander favor is in the Navy. And he encountered this thing that they call the the Tic Tac UFO. This is an object that they tracked on radar that went from 60,000 feet to one foot above sea level in less than a second. They don't know how fast it did it because it was a literally a blip in the radar went from 60,000 feet down to one. They have no idea how fast it moved. They have no idea how it did it. It shows no signs of propulsion. There's no heat no exhaust signature. There's nothing that has any that it's acting in any way like in any propulsion system that we've ever observed before I Yeah.


Yeah, John was telling me to watch it a show called close. That's it. Jimmy just nailed it. Whatever it was. Yes found it. You just did it. Oh it's back again. There's a little folks if you hear there's a little um, there's a little strange audio hum that Jamie's trying to track down that gets anyway and we'll get this worked out. Yeah, we'll get it worked out. I don't think anybody's gonna care they might I don't think so. So you how many ways if I had to give you a percentage of whether or not aliens are real? What's the percentage for you? 81? .3. Ml that's a good number 81 points. That's likely.


Yeah likely. I mean, how could it not be? You know, how could it not be I you know, I really don't even it was kind of odd that he and I were talking about it, but he has a really nice plane and he lives in Malibu and Austin and so every time he moves from one city to the other it happens to fit my schedule exactly. Right? So like that's weird. I was going to Beverly Hills today. How about I hop on the play Ron? I'm on it by myself. Come on, let's go and nice. So when he pops back down to Austin, even if it's just for a couple of days, you know, I'll hop on and I really enjoy this guy's mind and I consider him a mentor in business and life.


I know he was talking about John Paul dejoria and but he just started talking about I hear nothing but good things about that guy that he's the best. Here's a fascinating dude. Oh, yeah. Yeah you you know if he would Your podcast if you doing I think you would I would love to have them on you know, he's got it started selling shampoo out of the trunk of his car, you know and and sold Patron. I think last year for 5.1 billion dollars and still owns 6660 other companies including Paul Mitchell. Would you started here's the thing at what point do you stop working when you that guy ever never you never wants to stop?


He never consider stopped and I was so shocked when he sold Patron because I just didn't think he ever would you know, because he doesn't need to sell it and but for whatever reason he did and and in fact I said something made him laugh really hard because he told me about it. He called me and told me so I sold it to Bacardi for 5.1 billion and I said, well that sounds like a lot of money but it sounds like more money when you realize the point one is a hundred million dollars. So that's not Biggest point one there is right. There is no point one trillion there don't even exist. It's a point 1 billion is a hundred million, but he said that watch him watch a show which I never watched because I think he got an advance copy of it, which was Close Encounters of the fifth kind is what it's called and I looked it up and it was coming on something but it hadn't been on you.


So I think he just got an advanced copy of it and he said that it'll take every single day out of your mind. That's ever been there waiting. Minute isn't that those Steven Greer movie? No stats Close Encounters of the Third Kind. No. No, that's Steven Spielberg. Oh, yeah. Okay. Yeah. She was see myself as a guy we had on the podcast before Oh that wrote the yeah. He's a he's a ufologists air quotes Okay sideways face, right skeptical hippo face, right blank Monica. Yeah. There's a lot of fucker in that UFO world. There's a lot of people that are making documentaries and a lot of people that are there. Real good one though about Bob Lazar called Bob Lazar UFOs and Area 51.


I think that's exactly the title of it. But it's by my friend Jeremy Korbel and it's about this guy was a physicist who worked at area S4 and the Nevada desert right back engineering this craft that the government had recovered and immediately upon working there realize like what in the fuck is this like right away knew this was no technology that we had currently available. I mean this guy's a fizzle. He was a physicist a nuclear physicist at Los Alamos labs. All right works on weapon systems, right? Yeah and window and got there and was like, what are you guys doing? Like what what is this and they were basically explaining like these are recovered UFOs and one of them apparently according to him was very old and that it was from some sort of an archaeological dig they found and the propulsion system that these things used was that they use this Called Element 115 that wasn't even proven to actually exist until I think it was 2013.


They prove that it exists in a particle collider but this guy was talking about in 1989 and he said that they had a stable Supply. Is that your phone that keeps doing that? I'm sorry. It's all right. It's weird debut the baby. That's the whole problem. That's UFOs the but this documentary is fascinating because the propulsion system that he's describing. Ying is exactly the same that Commander favor Had described in The Tick-Tock UFO that they found off of just kind of shut it so it doesn't make noise. I just turned it off. Did you the would be nice they do I need I'm irrelevant dude. I'm not irrelevant. No, no, no stop saying that anyway, the the propulsion system that he described in 1989 is exactly the same propulsion system that they witnessed this Tick Tock UFO using in 2007 or whatever it was it David favor.


And seeing this thing off the coast of San Diego. So what those people that saw these crafts that were monitoring in the military there were saying they see these like every few months they see these things. They don't know what the fuck they are. Don't know what to do. They scramble Jets to go watch them. They actively block their tracking systems and then they disappear faster than you can look at it. Just don't just take off. They have no idea what they are. They don't know where they're from. They don't know what they're doing. And then the Pentagon recently has come forth. And release the statements and one of them being that they've recovered crafts that are not of this world. There you 6.6. I'm up to eighty six point six.


My little cigarillo went out of oh, no, it drops dirty. Tobacco juice in this fucking thing. I'm going to scoop that bad boy out of there. I'm going to keep drinking but I'm in dude. I'm all like 95% you're down from a hundred and I'm up to 86. That's I listened to my own bullshit. I graduated stop. Stop your about. I'm gonna drink this with you ashes. I don't give a fuck. I got to turn my phone back on. I got to show you we gotta show me the pig UFOs. No the pig. the pig Whitney Cummings Pig Whitney Cummings Bay I mean, I'm not sure there's no way you could pilot there it is for there. Kapow. There it is.


Yeah, that's it. Yes Whitney Cummings Pig. So she was the first person explained to me. Those miniature pigs are not real. No, right? Yeah, that's proof right there, right? How little is that pig? Well, they think they're miniature pigs as they starve them. So people buy this little tiny pig though. This is a miniature as a teacup pig and like, oh great who wouldn't want that, you know, defeat it, right and it grows to be, you know, Alex Raymundo bought three of them and they He didn't think we live in Palmdale. And he eventually they just got out and then every once in a while, he'd see him now, they have tusks and they weigh 450 pounds and their rump so this place here at last and let's finish the story.


We were on what store the UFL part. Yeah. Oh well go back into the pigs. The baubles are documentaries a must-see. I'm directing you should see it but not direct away. I love you do whatever you want. But the Bible is our documentaries a must-see. See if you're if you're curious and on the fence about UFOs, and I have that guy in here. I talked to him he gave one of the first interviews that he's given and a long fucking time and I picked his brain for hours. I'll go back and listen to it. He he didn't seem like a bullshit artist to me. He there's there's some weird parts of it, but there's always going to be weird parts. Are you talking about literally back-engineering something that someone from another planet invented and using some technology that we don't understand and one of the analogies that he had was imagine if you brought Nuclear reactor to the Fourteen hundreds and introduced it to them which 1400 does nothing 600 years ago right terms of the age of the universe.


It's a fucking not even a blink of an eye. I think we should just go back to 1800 1800. Show me the queer. Are you surprised about a nuclear warhead? Let's go to 1936. Yeah. Sure. I nuclear reactor that was his his like this technology is it is technology. It's clear that they figured out how to manipulate this element and use it to bend. Gravity, and that's the propulsion system instead of using something that pushes like a fire that pushes against, you know, the wind and pushes you in a certain direction or propeller that pulls you into a certain direction instead of that. It bends Gravity the way he described as like if you put a in a massively heavy bowling ball in the center of a bed, right?


It just sunk everything into the bed. That's basically like a very crude description of what this element does. With their this reactor that they have on these spaceships that it literally Ben's gravity around and allows you to just instantaneously jettison that that ship into another position in the United States top Joe. I'm getting a bloodletting. They're draining my blood into a ball to cure something that I've think I've got. What do you say again? Yeah, I think they've been here forever. I think they've been coming down here and observing us and waiting and also coincides with there's a giant jump in sightings right after the Manhattan Project, right?


So right after we started blowing up bombs, they're like, hey monkeys face a shit. Let's go visit him again. They probably got a you know, probably got a newswire. It probably got a Google news alert on their phones. Like oh Christ. Look at these things. Look at these crazy monkeys. What have they done? What have they done? What did they that? Okay 91. I'm up to 90 more. What are you down to down to 50% where I'm worried about try to pull you out of it. I'm always worried about things that I want to believe if I want to believe it. I'm always skeptical right we do I don't want to fuck up.


Thank you. Are you going to rinse em over? You're doing a little rinse. I mean, I suppose the job. I've been looking for maid service a. Johri. The only reason why I don't believe a hundred percent all the time is because I know I want to believe a hundred percent. So I think that I'm full of shit. Thank you, sir. I'm worried about my own desire to believe right because when you want to believe something so you can it's easier. Yeah, you can convince yourself of shit. That's not accurate It's Tricky write what you know, Many things you know, I was wondering how Trump got in evangelicals to support him.


And then I read the stories about Falwell Jr. And I'm like that all makes sense now. Oh well jr. Was going he's a free one. I battle see anything wrong with any of it. And then he told that to the rest of the guys and then oh was I laughing so hard, you know my parents used to Take me to see what's his name Jimmy Swaggart Swagger a swag. Remember when he got busted? Oh, yeah, and I'm like, I am the straightest human being sexually in the world compared to these guys and and I just but when this happened I laugh so hard because I just started thinking about him panting Trump on the shoulder going.


Hey, you know what? It's like I get it I get it. He's Liberty University. Right and what freedom and I was I was just searching for all that information and then it got to the point where he admitted that his wife had the affair with a pool boy. That's right out of a magazine. That's not even true, you know, so but but it is true and he goes but I wasn't there watching and I'm like, I already don't believe you I already don't believe this my wife and Fair, but I wasn't there watching them. Like wait, what was that? What the fuck just happened? Would you say you weren't there watching?


Okay. Alright, whatever. I did not fuck that guy's Pig but didn't do it. What? Why'd you bring it up? And what are you talking about man? Where's that? Where's that from? I already don't believe I think they're all freaks. Yeah, how do you mean all the envelop evangelicals that make all that money? There's no way that our yeah Power right away. They just stopped at the money. I used to do stand-up comedy in this in the Sheraton Sand Key hotel in Clearwater Florida, which is the same hotel where Jessica Hahn fuck Jim Baker who in the in the presidential suite up there and you know, and he was it's the same story right?


It's always the same story and then Kennison ended up fucking I grabbed whatever was around comes around, but she was on kiddo. Kinnison and her we're on stirring together. I think she called in when kinnison was there and she was calling him fucking loser. He's like, you're a whore right? Yeah. I remember I remember those are terrible but the fact that she went from being this lady who fucked this famous preacher to being like this quasi celebrity. And this was before reality TV. We gotta remember back in those days. It was only a few of those weird pseudo celebrities, right? So maybe the beginning of reality TV. Yeah. Way on yeah in a way. That was the beginning.


Well, you know, Tammy Faye wouldn't blow any right? Probably not anymore. Charlie had to get to the dance. Yes, but she lost it when she was in she had the eyelashes. Yeah, it kind of stunk one day. She got afraid of it then she died from Diet Coke. I think she's one of them people that they go. I think she drank a hundred Diet Cokes have done like a week ago. I was in what is this? It's like I hooked up with his girl. What does it say? Jerry Falwell Jr. Allegedly caught on tape warning pool boy not to make wife jealous. What this is what I thought you guys were talking about. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah that that handsome. Fella. Yeah young boy.


Apparently, he would watch the young fellow would say that Jerry Jerry jr. In the corner. Yeah and watch but imagine if your was a point in my life will I would have watched our fuck him if I was bored and yeah, you know, you have to be real board, but well for that one. Yeah me just to be real bored. Us on the unless you like unless you are trying to really corrupt your wife you like I know what I'm going to do. I'm going to get some guy to fuck her in front of me and that bitch can't say shit right now on I could do all kinds of wild stuff. Like I watched a pool guy. Fuck you. I was in the right arms crossed. I got pictures on my cell phone.


I was watching you suck his dick like this. If you want, I mean if you really want to corrupt someone to the point where they got to leave you alone with all your deviance, that would be one way to do it. That's probably the best way if you're a woman because like like a woman cheating on a man for whatever reason seems more scandalous than a man cheating on a woman in general and then on top of that I don't know why it seemed easy Angeles, but it does easy Joe because it seems like men cheating at ma'am. It's all depended upon the person it's all the on the individual but it's scandalous because it's more scandalous because the man's letting her like there's more threesomes and I'm just pulling this number out of my hat.


But I think this is more threesomes than involved the wife or the girlfriend bringing in another woman right ever then a guy bringing in another guy. Right? Right. Okay, you know, I love my wife but she wants she wants. Hey Bob. She wants you to fuck her so I'm going to watch that's probably way more rare. Are probably way way way way more because I have multiple friends that have had their their girlfriend or their wives bring home other gals. It seems normal. Now I had a friend that we did when our friend whatever but the first time I met him was playing golf with him and he showed me a video fucking tape of his wife getting banged by a really attractive huge black guy and he didn't even know me it goes.


Look at this. You handed me the camera. That's my wife is out because my wife and I'm like, that's my age. All right. Well, can I get a check please? I'm gonna have to go. Yeah, that's the guy was he's establishing some Loose boundaries right very very loose very least for himself to and you before your friendship. Yeah, I think right go real weird with that guy. He's already shown you video of his wife get fucked. I was thinking that he was trying to rope me into this but probably and and if I would have done it, then he would have gotten footage of that and then boom he'd have nobody's with me too. Yeah, you know, I don't know what I would have done to great. That's what I'm saying. That's probably how they do it.


This a lot of that like sex is such a weird thing in terms of like what's acceptable to some folks is deviant others. And I think there's a lot of these people that are Evangelical types in particular, especially that probably they can't hold that standard. There's no way right right that's standard of Pious - they're out there speaking God's word right doing it to thousands and thousands of people and it's a powerful position which It's women horny, you know and then you start getting these little opportunities pop up there with a never popped up if you were down at the First Baptist Church in Oaxaca, right then but now you're the First Baptist of the world.


It's probably kind of hot right a woman comes up a real deeply Christian woman Jerry Falwell Jr. I just tell you I am a woman of God, but there's something about you that brings a fire to my loins next thing, you know next thing, you know, you're doing coke. Right in a penthouse. Yeah with a big old glass of red wine pouring everywhere crushing up pills. Listen. Don't sweat that Donald Trump's my friend. I'll call him right now. I never like what no, no trouble. Really Mar-A-Lago. I got a gold card.


Look at that gold card. Why else would you be a billionaire? Why else right man, don't you want to party with you go ask lucky doing this want to be a billionaire your bank accounts full your balls are empty. What are you gonna what is the point my in the way Jamie my fucking up his camera. We're the aliens don't like this conversation average when you talk about him or the televangelists. Yeah, it's soon as someone is telling you, you know, like how to live your life and people are listening poor their kids fucking crazy.


All right what you can and can't do what God wants. We're at remember that hicks bit about Jesse Helms and he's gotta go here. It is something about that. They were interviewing. - after he died and she's talking about it Jesse's collection of little shoes. And well, that's what so fucked up. Remember when you used to think that pedophile Cults were just some ridiculous conspiracy theory, you know, I go. Hey man, there there's an island and they fly people up and down the fuck underage girls like yeah.


I'm really going on Jeff get out. Here with this nonsense me while Clinton's like it. Well, here's my friend. We flew a lot. That's good. We flew together. It's not a big deal. He's a good guy. I played golf with him once and and he told me a joke. It was or you set it up as a story. So it's pretty good. Yeah, and he goes it's a rapper friend that he knows and and he was in a Maserati dealership and thought Thug that and the guy goes are you thinking about buying one of these cars and he goes no, I'm going to buy one of those. I'm thinking about pussy. Yeah, that's an old joke. Is it? Well, then sold joke Clinton's a hack. Yeah, I had heard it.


So to me, it was just quintessential pussies story with the word pussy in it. So pussy. All right. Yeah, it's his you ever done crashing or do you just do that one? I got a I got a few Impressions. Yeah. Yeah, but he's one of my favorite I did I had this bit that I was doing for a while. Have you ever thought about I had a new Netflix show called? Old ex-presidents high on mushrooms and the whole goal of the show is just to get Clinton and that you don't want to get Bush because he would just start crying. All right, you know, but but and Obama probably he knows how to do mushrooms like you probably cool with you like that would probably need to be that big a deal right? But but if you can get Clinton High on mushrooms, like just just get that guy to trip balls, right?


He should have got cock. That's what I think should have been up sax player, you know should have been a comic that Your guy. Oh, yeah, Anthony Weiner. Yes little bit comic be full-blown dumb enough right to become a comedian extended his dick out to everybody. He went to jail for senators dick to underage people though. Right? Right. That's what you did. But how do you know how old that person is your send that pic to be careful. You can only hope careful Jaden no, but fucking perverts and deviance, you know as he perverts and deviance that a good speakers. I'm like man you missed the opening. Open mic night. You're fucked up. You could have brought this to a bigger audience in the wrong business.


You're in a business where you get chastised. And did you lose everything for being who you are instead of like selling out stadiums right instead of people laughing you fucked up, bro. So you're an arena comedian. Right. I used to be before the Great Plague. No, but I mean that's the you know, the size numbers you draw when you decide to do stand-up is there colosseum's and shit like that it did you ever think that would happen in your life. I don't think it's happening when it's happening. All right, like when I'm here able to ignore it when I'm getting injured will most of the time I'm high, right? So when I'm getting introduced let there's a moment where I do not believe it's real and that that moment is always that's at comedy clubs.


That's a theaters and its most most certainly at Arenas. There's a moment where they like ladies and Gentlemen, please welcome Joe Rogan and you walk into a theater in the round and there's 15,000 people there, right? It does not feel real does not feel real it never feels real, but I know how to do it. Yeah, right go out and do it like it feels real. What's up. I've heard it. This is makes sense. This is normal. Well I lived Makes sense. I think when it makes sense, I'm in trouble when it doesn't want it doesn't freak me out. You know, that's that's when I'm in trouble. Yeah. Yeah it everybody. You know when we were doing blue-collar.


I think the biggest when we did was a little over 20,000 at where the place where they play hockey and in Nashville and we'll always have the record for attendance there because we have the smallest stage Elton John used to hold it. But we had a smaller stage in the middle. Right? So we like the hill at his desk the way around it and it was packed to the rafters with these huge series. And then afterwards we go back to the Loews Hotel and and there's a guy there from a magazine a doing interviews and my head is so pumped up. I was like, we I said some stupid shit and Foxworthy was just regular humble sweet Foxworthy right who never makes a mistake in those kind of ways because that's his nature.


Right is doesn't get drunk enough, right? Yeah, I do I get plenty drunk to say the wrong. Wrong fucking thing. And of course, so there were just some really arrogant sounding quotes out of that. But but how what's my head supposed to feel like after that, you know after I just walk off stage of with 20,000 people screaming like a like I'm a beetle or whatever crazy and how do I calm down from that? I don't know how you do. I don't know. I've never figured it out. I just I just shake my head and go. Wow, is that real? That's why those rock stars daddy 27, you know, they didn't they can figure that out. It happened to them. Yeah. You didn't happen to me till I was in my late 40s, not only that it happened to them before.


It happened. Anybody else before them, right? There was no rock stars before the rock star. So before the 50s and the 60s, nobody selling out 25 thousand seats, like of course Elders died on the toilet go with pills other fuck. Is he supposed to manage this thing that no one's ever had to manage before and no ideas. No blueprint. There is none for us. We could look at you know, Chris Rock and Richard Pryor and Steve Martin and all these other big acts that came before us and Go. Okay. How did these guys handle it? Can I talk for them to that? Could I sit down with Louis CK? Could I sit down with Dave Chappelle would tell me what it was like what mistakes? Do you know? What how do you what is it like when you walk out it's set with booby traps and I stepped in every one of them.


I mean it was like I was trying to hit them all. Oh the clock clock clock really where they're everywhere. I put a foot Block. It's fun when you do it with other people Chappelle and I did a bunch of gigs. We were supposed to do a bunch more until the covid hit but we The record of the Tacoma Dome it was 25,000 people. You just said that to bring my number of 20,000. I just had it in my pocket right and here I got this. I'm going to throw it on him a DJ and you know, right he's like it's a whole thing is so crazy lights are spinning around and everything and there's there's nothing that you feel like first of all you like and Dave said to me write what right for it. He went on stage like we're hanging out in the back and he's like not a lot of motherfuckers get to do this right this right this way said it right.


Like man like yeah and Dave like me gets fucked up before shows, right? He's like, I like hanging out with other dudes to get really high before shows because there's something about that wild ride iock in it, too. I liken it to skiing downhill when you're going too fast. All right, you know you're in trouble but you can still do it. Yeah, you make it you'll and at the end, you know, like whoa, that was dangerous because I really didn't have control of that. It wasn't boring my comedy career. My goal was to be smoking a joint outside that door take a big hit ladies and gentlemen round white blow the hid out in their face. Hi, ha ha at one point in time.


Then you did it. So many times it was like, all right. Yeah, it's a fun way to do comedy. This is the most fun thing about comedy is not just doing comedy but doing comedy with other people that are also enjoying doing comedy. That's like that's why the fucking store so great. All right, that's why we have to recreate that here my friend. Well, yeah, but you're moving it out to a fucking Ranch through the we all get tried we all get to live on the ranch you want to yeah, that'd be great. I will absolutely be interested in that. We all move out to the ranch and I'll Up barbecue chunks of property on the Lance just for Comics. How about every comic every comic that's like a legit headliner gets like a two-acre plot of land on the ranch.


You got a nice yards you do whatever you want build a house for you. Do we got to come on do we got to do you know anybody but you gotta fuck my wife and I want to film it. Whoo, I gotta tell ya I just met her and I'm in. Oh God. I had no idea. I mean I figured she was but I I've never seen a picture of her anything save a person she's so beautiful and what its lady got a cold personality and but yeah, you could watch. I wouldn't I wouldn't care whose love ya. Bring in the pool boy. Who's got the camera. Yeah, I don't really want to have a cult on a ranch.


But but I do think would be fun to have a comedy club out there. You know, there's this really cool building. It's not too far from your house and it's a you know your wish I wish I wish I knew the titles are some of the stuff but it was a cult and they built a theater, right? Here right next to you right next to Travis. You know, what they were we went to see Monty Montgomery that and I didn't you go with us over there to play that theater the little 350 sees explain to people that are just listen sometimes the ask questions to his son Marshall who's in the room. So it's like Woody who your uncle like what are you saying right now? He's my memory is Jamie's got it one World Theater.


Yeah. Oh shit. It's this guy was a cult figure and he built this for him. - look at that dude right here and look at it, right? Oh my god, of course you had a so this is over by your house and it seats about 350 people. I did a show there the other night how many people look at there. It is right there 350. I think it looks like 350 there. But perfect that's a perfect size for comedy club. Yeah, it is was that guy dead hit? Well the cult dissolved and now they do occasional shows in it and The guy still alive click on him James. I don't know click on him down there though.


The lower right hand corner the bottom picture know what below it below it below that one below that below that right there that one that's him. That's a cold guy. Yeah guarantee. Yeah, there he is. Yeah, there's something on Netflix and that I watched it just looks full of shit. This is like this is a certain fake spiritual. Look that's like one of my favorite looks he looks like he would fuck. Body anybody I always feel like with fake spiritual women. They're just trying to find themselves. I give him a free pass, right but fake spiritual dudes in my ear. Just trying to Buck. I see what you're doing. You're looking for an angle. It is Teddy Kennedy lost women.


I know what you doing, bro. Yeah, nice abs though, huh? Crazy ABS. I must watch his diet. Yeah a lot of cops. Yeah. But anyway that building is right over by your house. Well, I don't want a cult building that seems like a terrible you did it. That's what made me this ideas. You were the one bringing up the kill chip. I'm gonna do it. The right way to reach the key to successful cult is you have no membership do whatever you want. You don't have to you can leave whenever you want, you know. Everybody's wife and you don't take ten percent of their money. That's the key. What's the point thing? They're doing it all wrong? Okay. What's the point the point? All right, so please just stay slightly drunk and keep moving right?


That's that's the point. I would like to say. Tah-dah you do it already. Yeah. Yeah micro dosing and slightly drunk. Yeah, that should be the title of your book If you ever written a book that New York Times bestseller, oh shit wrong white and their right to remain silent, but I didn't have the ability was Number one it came in tied for 15th Place, which makes you a number one bestseller and for the rest of your life, that's amazed. But it on your fucking Tombstone. That's pretty amazing. And basically we just had asked me to do and I said no and and then they ask me again and said for this much money I said no, I don't have time. I'm not going to write a book. It's not what I do.


I'm doing stand-up and I'm doing well because it was after everything was clicking right and then they said how about we just copy a transcript of your show. And put that in there and then you just add a couple stories. I'm like for how much and they said this much I said, yeah, let's do that. So and it and I had to go on a book tour which was a pain in the ass and sign books. But still it was a New York Times bestseller. Congratulations. Yeah. Well, I'm also an honorary member of the Harvard Lampoon. Are you really? Yeah. What else which is very cool, you really good at badminton some with that. I'm okay at ping pong used to be good at being pain, but nothing bothers the tricky tricky.


That's a that's a touch thing Gotta Be You Gotta Have a ping-pong table in your ping pong all the time, but I was good at a hundred sixty pounds. I doubt it at 2:00 2:15. I don't think I'm that good. Now they have lost some of my twitch I get it. It's harm the knees to there's a lot like tennis when I see people play - Mike manually have so much meniscus. Oh, did you know that's dr. Phil, you know I play golf. Dr. Phil, but he plays tennis that just game and it keeps his niece. Oh fuck. It's a great game. I loved playing it. I'm out there. It's amazing how much he sounds like Clinton but it snows a little bit different. I know it's different. But but he but that tennis keeps his knees fucked up.


He's sick. He was no more big guy and he tore shoulder parts available. What is this? Oh, yeah. I've heard of that. That's they haven't been as Beach but like the thing that's pop it's tennis for old people but it's popular an awesome scene off to move as much that the idea. Yeah. Look how fat look at that fat guy. Yeah. Yeah, but see once you play virtual reality Games. This is seems like a stupid waste of time out there playing pickleball, you know, you play like one of them sandbox games you ever gone to a Sandbox. You know what that is. Yeah. It's a virtual reality Studio where you go to like a warehouse they strap you up with a haptic. You so you feel when you get hit and you put a helmet on through your virtual reality.


You wear gloves and you you play these fucking crazy games, like all kinds of wild games. Like like you're on a pirate ship and the pirate ship gets taken over by demons and skeletons are chasing after you shoot muskets at the skeletons on here. Apparently. Yeah. They do. I've seen it. I think the original one might have been in Austin, I believe so but I played it in the Woodland Hills out near the old Studio. It's a blast. Oh my God. It's fucking awesome so much fun. It's so much fun. And it makes you realize like you were around when pong came out member when you have the little turd. Yeah, put it we thought everything that could be invented has been invented. Yeah. So this is this is fast forward a little bit.


I don't care about these people signing up. Oh, you can't okay. Well have all the glitches figured out. They go through this thing you put on this this thing on your foot and on your hands and the suit and the headgear and then you go into these rooms and Your transformed into this Avatar and you play these wild fucking games and what that was an awesome when the zombie one is awesome. You're in a house and the house is overcome by zombies and they come falling out of the ceiling and running towards you and you're gunning them down, but your weapons good. Yeah, you can take them out. Yes you their heads explode. It's fucking awesome. It's amazing. Yeah, you're gunning them down dot dot dot dot dot and you watch their little zombie bodies get riddled with bullets. It's amazing, but it's like when you were when we're talking about playing pong, dude.


Like when we were kids and we were first playing that like this is incredible on playing something that's on the TV. That is what I look at when I look at these games I say what is it going to be like in 50 years What's it gonna be like 45 years right five years. It's going to be fucking amazing not going to be pickleball have much ready. Hey that pickle ball hit the fucking door. Yeah. It's going to be awesome. It's going to be spaceships. And now you're going to be hanging out with Bob Lazar because we played paintball, you know, which stings right? That's that actually hurts. Yeah PayPal has but it's what's but it's also fun as fuck. But this looks like this is another version of that in air conditioning and you don't have to feel the pain of that paint ball hitting the rib.


They have one-on-one like sword fights you fight with each other with like modern like crazy weapons type situations and like meet my daughter killed me. You killed me in a one-on-one combat, which letter didn't you? It all right, but it was fun the fun games menu. Just imagine what it's going to be like, you know doing something where you really can't distinguish like you're real. It's fun. You're seeing it all it's wild the videos. Wild. You feel it? Like your chest vibrates when you get hit it's pretty cool. But imagine what it's going to be like when you can't distinguish it between this and real reality and you get to fuck the thing. You're fighting that's going to happen. Right? Sure. That's next.


Oh that's coming the moment they could figure out how to do. That like with this Elon Musk neural link where they're doing that the moment they can figure out how to tap into your senses to make you really feel like you're having sex with like, you know, Tara Patrick in her prime I'm talking. All right. Whoo some super hot. What's up J. You gotta watch that one. Bla black mirror episode. I we were going to watch that one day and I was like, you should watch this at another time. But oh, yeah, they set up the scenario where it is. It's two guys playing virtual reality one's a guy one's a girl they fuck each other and they end up realizing they can fuck each other. That like causes this whole fucking chaos of problems. They both have girlfriend or wife, whatever the fuck and they want to bang each other and they're like who's gonna be the girl though?


Oh boy, that would be the real question. Right if you that's the reason I want to go on living. I would Brigitte Bardot and me and Sophia Loren back in the day in 66. Oh my God. Yeah back when Ferraris that skinny tires. The old days the old days people didn't know any. What are you? What are you driving? Now Joe. I got a lot of cars come on different stuff how many I like that but you know, I got that I got the 56 Corvette eyeshadow. Yeah, it would have been rated. I was gonna drive it up another beautiful. Yeah, I have that one. That's 65. That's 65 is prettier than mine.


That's crazy car man that car. That's the car that I drive around where I can't believe it's mine. Yeah, I can't believe that's really my dad. Yeah when you bring that up because you know the The parking lot at the comedy store is a shit show, but it's a shit show between Ultra successful comedians who have great cars and guys that haven't had a Netflix special yet. But as soon as they do get one they get a car and right and then you got you know, it was never like that, you know, like that place is filled with like millions of dollars in cars. Now these it was for the lockdown. Yeah, right. Well the old days it was half the parking lot. You know, I'm really successful Comics up there and then some great. Makes it hadn't hit it yet.


Yeah all doing shows but we were there the other day. There was a Ferrari three Porsches a Lamborghini. I was like, this is the craziest parking lot I've ever seen like Russell Peters Lamborghini truck was there I was like, this is madness this this mean it's when it was Rockin, you know, I mean when I say this like the old days but it was really only seven months ago right seven months ago rocking every night and fun as fuck it was we were in the golden years we really was. Was as far as comedy goes, I've been there since 94 never been anything like it is now. All right, because the internet that's part of your podcast and Marin's podcast and all the people that feed it are also working there every single night of the week that they were touring and you know it bread a place to go have fun and I think it all stems from them their intrinsic nature was always who embraced stand-up comedy and it didn't matter about your Insanity.


So if you wanted to be Z can be crazy here at the comedy store and it's about pie right here. You have our own bar right here. Yeah, and you could snort cocaine off this piano shaped fucking thing in the dressing room with the main room. It's a mirror the mirror a little piano made out of mirrors that was built for prior to do blow off of and then many people followed in his footsteps and but they've embraced that it made it fun and made the comics feel important. You're right if you want to smoke pot at At The Improv, you have to go stand on Melrose Avenue and spoke it in traffic because they don't give that yeah didn't care like they did it.


They didn't understand it the same way. They did in the comedy improv changed a little bit over the years. Well, I got that new they have a new club up there now, but I haven't been in it since it was finished. Yeah, it's there's something about the store with a realized that the comedians are why the people are there right? Whereas other clubs that's why the comics Park right next to the door. And you park where the fuck you can yeah. And because you're going to get something that you didn't even pay for when you walk in here. Yeah, you know you're going to you're going to see Rogue and incomings and and all the best colleges were of the Joey Diaz. Just rocking the fucking place D has moved to, New Jersey. I talked to him about it man. You know, he's one of the guys that did that checks up on me.


Yeah, you know just to I get a call once a month or every month and a half or whatever from D is just look I tell you run like hell, yes. How are you color darker, right. Here you go. Just checking in on you. And you feel like he's doing it because he gives a shit. He doesn't you know, he does and yeah we were talking about is that was like come to Austin with us. You know, we're We got to this is what I didn't you know, if I'd known about the ranch and though two acres I could have had a mule. Can we get do we get home? I'll give you a meal. This is what's gonna happen. Joey D is going to go through one, New Jersey winter. Yeah, I realized oh, he's been out there with us since 96. There is no winter isn't even dead. He's going to go to one of those shitty New Jersey winners.


And then I'm gonna call him up in April ready for like Joe dear. You'll really Jody has a Spotify money is burning a hole in my pocket. Come on man. Come on out here. I'll sponsor you. Let's make something happen. And I got a club going on. I want you to do a residency. Let's get Rollin come out here and you'll do it. I hope so. I hope so calm. I have to find out a really bad day. I might have to fly out there and bend the knee. I'll five I'll flap their way we go k other let's do it. I'll do whatever I can do. I'm accepting the fact because there's no comedy right now. I'm accepting the fact that he went to New Jersey, but I'm only accepting it temporarily that's it's like a big like if you looked at my brain, like if my brain was a circle like a pie.


To be like a 15% sliver get Joey Diaz on New Jersey. That's like losing my favorite game four sets in there man. He's the listen he is he's a big factor in all this and in the store and in my career and in comedy and podcasting in general, he's a big factor because he's the party like when Joey Diaz like and especially me and him together because he knows what a fan I am of his right? So when I'm in the room with him, he knows how much I love him and he can just be free. He could be wild and he knows that I think he's the funniest guy that's ever lived. So when he's rocking and rolling and I'm in the room and I'm dying laughing.


I'm the best audience ever, right? I love it. Yeah. I just he's just he's a such a unique person. He's so he's so unique. I don't know anybody like him. He's so wild and crazy and stories are so ridiculous. This is such a crazy person but a good person too. He's a really sweet. He's genuinely sweet. I mean he calls to check on me. Whoever called to check on me. You know, he does that to everybody. Yeah, well, I assume he does. I mean I assume he wouldn't his Peach. No, he's amazing. He's amazing. I love him to death. I just thought he's got this thing. He came from Jersey want to go back to Jersey. That's good. Let me get that out of your system. Do one winter there. All right, I'm gonna be I'm gonna fucking be I'm gonna take a picture on a canoe like, I'm Lady Bird Lake kicking back with like a margarita go Joey.


What are you doing? He digging yourself out of your fucking driveway. Come to Texas exes. Joey got a club the moment. I can't do anything until I open up the club. And once I open up the club, then I'm going to start going to start calling people. But Tim Dylan, he's going to come out here Hinchcliffe wants to move out here red band wants to move out here. Yeah, we're gonna get a bunch of them out here. And once we have a club then I mean it's will put up the bat signal and I'm just gonna my goal for a club is not to make any money. My goal is to break even Have everybody paid well and just just just just like let's establish community and let's do a thing in in Austin like we were doing in La where we're basically just working on the art and and have it an awesome place where people can come to see great Comics fuck around and work on material and because of the podcasts and because of us talking about on the podcast, I think they understood what the store was for the understood that except it was our Hub, right?


It was our home. And that we all we come like with a guy like you and a guy like me and you like we don't necessarily work together. You know, what you work at your places and then I work at my places in the only time we get together. Is it a club where we're working on material as your headline into these big fucking places and I'm going off of these other places and we need a place or that's like a hub like a home base and that's the store was for us, but I think this that's created because of comics, you know, that's the reason When I play the store or the factory or The Improv would have played all of them or the or Pasadena ice house.


I would never ever let anybody come with me not whatever woman I was with naughty friends that I had. I would not let anybody go with me to those shows because I didn't want to worry about him. I wanted to go there and be a part of the comedy community. Yeah, and not to be bothered by anything else. Let this be my time to recharge relax talk to people who have chosen the same exact path. I've chosen in life and those are rare but they're gathered. Yeah, right and we have access to them and that's why I live. So close to their you know, I lived a mile and a half I guess from if I didn't have kids. I live right next door to that place.


Right? Well, you could add another rope, you know, you get out so the so that it and that's what was so precious and drawing. To me about it is that I got to go talk stand-up comedy. Tell jokes laugh so hard I couldn't breathe and the around comics. Yeah just didn't and you know, I always kept it to myself. You know, that was always my thing. Yeah, you know the you're not not me bringing people to see me or my manager. Fuck you. Do don't you come see me in a big show when I'm not trying new shit, you know, yeah, I know because if I'm eating it on stage and and I have a friend in the audience, you know. They feel horrible, you know, it's not me that feels bad his them and I feel bad for them feeling bad.


I'm like, sorry, you know, fuck I knew it would I knew it was going to work. I've had the same manager since I was an open mic. ER. Wow. Yeah my manager found me in Boston in 1990 almost 791. Yeah. I was basically just just scratching out a living look I would get a few paid gigs, but I was basically a beginner, you know, I'd get paid gigs. Now and again, but it wasn't. Are you still shooting pool for money? No, I started doing that after I tore my ACL I hurt my knee and I had to rehab my knee and I had to get knee surgery and I was hanging out with my friend John and we would go to this executive billiards in White Plains New York because I'd moved to New York to do stand up because I met my manager in Boston.


He flew me out to New York and or brought me out to New York and I lived there for from then I'll and I would go to this pool hall and I started seeing it was a I got just stumbled into it just blind luck. It was a pool hall where there's a lot of gambling like high-stakes game. I saw $10,000 pool game. Wow, how fun wild wild shit people gambling and betting money and yelling and all the everyone is back in the day when you can smoke. So it's the whole place is filled with smoke and it was like a different kind of deviance that was real similar to the deviance that I've experienced with comics and also the deviance that I experienced with Fighters because I You know, I grew up in martial arts.


I grew up around Fighters and they were a different kind of deviant. And then then I'm around these pool hall deviants. Then I realize there's there's there's a bunch of different clusters of people that didn't accept the society standards. They do like I don't want to live like that. I don't want to do what these people are asking me to do it when I want to live in a in a free way, you know want to be vagabonds. I met a lot of homeless people that I became friends with, you know, like I had a homeless guys would sleep on my couch my apartment like guys who would just pool Hustlers, they would come although they didn't have anywhere to stay. They would sleep underneath the tables at Chelsea billiards in New York.


So there was a 24-hour So when your manager found you what were you doing? I was driving limos. I had quit fighting by then and I had quit even teaching because I was teaching at Boston University. I had a taught accredited class in Taekwondo at Boston University. And I that was that was that was when I won the US Open and want a bunch of different like like National and Regional Taekwondo tournaments, and I was basically it Agua, no instructor and fighting and I was trying to make the Olympic team but along the way I started kickboxing and I realize the Taekwondo had all these fucking holes in it and then I realized that kickboxing was give me brain damage.


So sparring a lot and in my I was getting a lot of headaches and I was like, I think I might be wrecking my brain and then I quit doing stand-up or a quit fighting rather and I started doing stand-up and it took on all these other jobs because I didn't want to short I didn't want to shortchange my students. So I stopped teaching, so wasn't it? Just wasn't into it. Like I was before I was obsessed with stand up. So I quit my school. I quit teaching it be you I and I was driving limos and I was working for a private investigator was driving him around he lost his license and the DUI this to this day one of the funniest people I've ever met Dynamite dickless Dave Dolan's on the funniest fucking dudes I've ever met in my life. That's we call himself a clue.


They call me he would call me up. He goes smoking Joe. It's dynamite. Dickless Dave Dolan. He remained my friend to the day. He died. He died a few years back of cancer, unfortunately, but he remained my friend to the date. We actually had had a bunch of medical issues. He had a stroke a lot of shit went bad, but great dude, but remained friends with them to the day died, but he was literally one of the funniest people I've ever met that never never did stand up and it was funny as his cousin was build Downs who was one of the only As the comedy connection and so just randomly I fucking took I answered an ad, you know, we're talking about 1988.


I answered an ad in the newspaper. Someone's looking for an assistant for a private investigator. And I was like, ooh, that's a good job on be insistent to a private investigator. That sounds exciting. But really he needed a driver because he lost his license on a DUI. So I was driving dynamite dynamite dickless Dave Dolan around and we would catch. Well mostly is mostly Insurance scams. Mostly people that were you know, like they were getting disability insurance and they were still working on the side. We catch him doing that. But occasionally it was like some guy want him. There was one one guy to date was falling around one guy. Who's his he had this wife that just kept fucking this body builder and he would David get pictures in the sky plowing this girl and the guy was like, okay, we'll keep following her.


He's like, hey you sick fuck. He goes, I gave you the pictures he goes. I'm not fucking he goes this guy wants pictures. He wants the pictures. He's asking me to keep following. I got pictures of this guy fucking your wife. We're done with done buddy. You had a meet the guy and he was such a Boston like an Irish Boston character and he was he's a private investigator. Never want to do anything else. He loved it loved it loved catching people. Yeah. We have been there was a guy my golf club in Atlanta. That was a private investigator. And at our our assistant Pro ended up going to work for him this we had these two two two really big guys.


Both named was a Jason they were the to Jason's and one of them ended up being Colt Ford, you know, that is Colt Ford. Yeah. Sounds like a character Tom Selleck man, you know, it's a he was a country rapper and And when he's teaching me how to hit there is AA look at him and he's like Ali Joe Prater. Yeah, he told me we're hitting balls and he had a PGA Tour card for eight years. He's an amazing guy. Oh, really? Yeah damn and he he told his show is fantastic and people love it.


It's an Affliction shirt on right was a few. As me out there with those. Yeah. Yeah, that's very unfortunate lack of the day. But but I'm getting balls. He's working on my game. He goes. I'm really a rapper and I was like, did I get a check one of those other? I have a lot of could I get a check please and never really spoke to him again on a serious level but I was gonna do The Tonight Show and I knew that God and I can't believe it. I can't think of his name. Hey, my my brains been just skipping so bad today. But anyway, who was it that was on that show with one of the biggest rappers Kid Rock.


Now, we know na black guy been around forever run damn Rings cornrows. Ol Dirty Bastard. Fuck cornrows been around Jamie you follow black Twitter. Hello. I'm helpless. I could no more famous than I can even imagine the way of remembering that now is like it up find the day you're on an atom more famous and Lil Wayne. Yeah, Jesus. Yeah, Kendra's Newmar Snoop Dogg, right Jesus Christ. You couldn't remember Snoop Dogg. Fuck. I know. Oh, you know what? I thought it was like someone obscure. No. No, I told you it wasn't I said famous more famous than you can imagine Snoop Dogg. Well, that's about as famous as you can imagine.


So he gave me a CD and he said could you just give this to Snoop Dogg and I was like, Like no pocket and I didn't of course and but my wife at the time it was she was four point seven million wife said it's really good actually listen to it. I never did and I'm like and the next time I see him. He's on the cover a pollstar magazine. Whoa, and I'm like really and so he would tour with these big country acts because he could teach him how to play. Off and the crowds loved his fucking country rap and then a lot of these guys started implementing that in their songs and it was all because of him and and then he wrote some huge hits for other artists that had a rap country background to it.


Well, he he created it and ended up making a lot of money and but he was the the probe. Why was I telling you the story to begin with that? We rapper rapper? Golf no. No, we had passed their off. There's no way you could figure it out if I can't have that because I was going to go in there Donna. My dick was Dave Dolan. No. Yeah, right private investigator private investigator, right? So but it was the other Jason was the private investigator. They're opposed to so okay, but one of them ended up either really, you know, really good size country act that made a lot of money in publishing and that was him and he was my assistant Pro.


He still plays in all the pain. Beach AT&T stuff with with Larry the game. That's pretty wild someone be that good. Yeah. No, he really was. Apparently I didn't give it a chance, you know and even to this day. I've never really coughs one of those games where you can be like ranked number 20th and be a multi multi-millionaire. Oh, yeah ridiculous. Yeah. Anyway, just balling out of control. Most people don't even know who you are. Yeah. He's like going on today. So the big The Gather wins this week that the the Prize purse is 15 million. Where's that at? East Lake and Atlanta, Georgia? Oh, yes and like I know well I'm saying it like I'm just telling you, you know, I'm like yeah Eastlake.


All right. Well, you know, okay. Well, okay, I'll give you that. You don't know you don't know. I'm a professional sports commentator. That's one of my grad gigs and I don't even know the rules to most sports. Yeah that you know, that's the weird thing is that people don't people just think of you as famous. I mean my son It was a huge Fear Factor fan the first and you came back into fear if he were just talking about it and but a lot of people don't know you do the other saying write it all together for me may know the guy but most people I would venture to say don't know you do stand up more than they know you do other things. I just know so many or most famous hunger. You're right.


It's a contest is probably your most famous thing. I'm for Dome, of course, of course now because it's got into this weird place, but Yeah, it's I do a lot of shit, but I tell people they're like is easy good am I Rogan and as a comic that because I only see you as a comic I don't see you as if the voice of him a I don't see you as anything but a comedian, you know, because that's what I want you do, you know, I'll watch a fight, you know, and I love it. If you're commenting if you're not it's not that interesting and we were talking about that earlier, you know, if you've broken doesn't say it's not worth saying, you know, didn't you get heard any You know, I'm a mixed martial MMA.


I don't know I'm telling you. I just don't know that much about it. Like you don't know much about golf. I don't know anything about God all I know about Joe the comic I watch go on stage at the at the store and just ripped a good out of these crowds and it's so much fun to watch that. I don't really think about the rest of it. Like I said, when I first time I did your podcast I had no idea. Well, I like doing a lot of different things. I don't think I'd be the same person if I think I have a unique Mental illness that I need to be constantly stimulated with different challenging things. And if I'm not then I make problems for myself, you know, then addictions and weirdness and I'm the person that needs to I need to have challenges all the time and they have puzzles you have things to solve a need to have stuff to do.


Yeah, that's my unique mental illness like so when someone says like why do you do so many things like because I like being happy like be insane like if I don't I just figured it out over time in my life that if I don't have things that challenge me, like if I don't get up early and work out if I don't do something that's hard to do. I'm not the guy can't sit around and that's you know, that shit bothers me wake up with nothing to do every day. That's why I've settled into this retirement. I got to tell you I have not hated the last six months of my life when I had nothing to do at all. Not even think of this is the first thing I had scheduled to do in a half a year and I would and I was a little resentful of this morning.


It was raining. I'm like I got to go do something. You know, I got to go do something. That's the first time I made a commitment. So if I tell you I'll do it. Of course, I'll do it. Right I'll get there early day. We're here. Yeah great danger and but but but outside of that I've enjoyed this time off, but I'm also older, you know, eivol Moulder and I've you know, you know, I'm at a retirement. Harrogate you know that that kind of settled into it going this is not that bad my wife taught me how to go on vacations. I wasn't good at it. Yeah, I need help. I need to learn how to just accept the fact that I was just not going to do anything. You just have fun and be on the beach and just drink and just relax and just swim and do whatever the fuck you do beaches.


But I've Gotten Good at it now really? I'm better at it than you. Yeah, let's get ready. Now. I'm a beginner. I used to think of it. His like I see some pictures of you in the garage out and Jabo with no shirts on going what the fuck's going on here, you know having fun. Yeah. Well, you know what I learned I learned how to relax. Sometimes you think I used to think that if I took time off I was losing progress. This is how psycho am yeah. I'm like, I'm losing I'm losing. I'm going to get I'm going to get out of shape on. My martial arts is going to slip my comedy is going to slip all the I'm not going to Doing podcast that's going to slip the I had this sickness that way then I realized that as a healthy part that happier and healthier.


I am as a person the better I am and all those other things. So the more time I'm hanging out and just having fun if I can do that and just recharge then when I come back I'm better. So every time I've come back from a vacation. I've been more enthusiastic when I'm more enthusiastic. I'm always better at everything I do because there's more there's more positive energy more. Appreciation, you know, right? So that's how I look at it. So I haven't I've been hated this time off. I don't like what's going on with the country. I hate what's going on with the country. I wish I miss the days and people could just disagree. Yeah Adam at the truth. Isn't that the truth or we can all go privately into a voting booth vote for who we vote for and the next day we wake up and see who's President, you know, when exam no fight was necessary.


We all did what we were put here to do which was to go vote and And after that you just accept it and go on change what you can if you can if you can't just fucking go on with it. I haven't hated it either but also like you I'm probably a little further along in life that I'm like it rare brealey feel like I did so much of it. Maybe that was enough. Maybe it was well you but if you're going to build the fucking Ranch and I get to acres and a mule and a mother of four in four acres and a mule because I was on the news. Alright to me before you heard it right down everybody write it down for it. Listen, whatever you want.


Whatever you want. We'll make it how I want to plow with a seat on it. That's what I want to plow with a seat. That's what I want. The idea is just do something crazy and have fun and I already done that by moving out here and just packing up that was resolved of dude. That was a bizarre move out. You know, it's like bizarre moves right? Don't get don't let the Not only Joe they can still surprise you. You know, I like doing things you're not supposed to do. I like doing like I like doing things like this like just fucking pack up the whole thing and doing it right when we're moving a Spotify, right? So it's a big crazy deal and then there's always controversy behind like that.


Looks like a tax Dodge and it's a little bit of that for sure. I don't I definitely don't like paying that much intact. I can't I can't tell you how surprised and thrilled I was to hear you were going to move to Austin and be my neighbor because I'm out of I'm out LM selling the house and yeah and Beverly Hills and and I'm like go good. This is going to work out fine. We have fun out here man. We can have a lot of fun out here. I really think so. I like I really like your vision of the Of the Austin comedy scene to come and you know what? There's also a lot of really good stand-up comics in Austin for sure always have that in there.


They flourish and these Open Mic nights. And I know that they're listening to this conversation right now going I want to help them. I want to I want to get my five years in to get my acres. And yeah, I just want to I really do I want to help them. I want to help them the way I've tried to help a lot of up-and-coming comics and Lala and get them on the podcast promote them and the the idea Is we open up a club when we open up a club? I should say is to have these local guys come in pump them up. Let people know let me know. There's a real scene here there. Yeah and and help them and help them help them flourish and help comic not just Austin Comics, but everywhere, you know, bring them into this place and have this be a hub the only reason why LA's a hub is because of a The Comedy Store and be Hollywood and I came to Hollywood because I had a TV deal but really what I wanted was to be at the store.


That was Mecca to me read it. I had heard about it when I was in Boston, but when I came to The Comedy Store 94 was a shit hole. I mean they're the comics are terrible. So every now and then Martin Lawrence show up or Damon Wayans or da my rera or Dice Clay, but for the most part was a lot of bodachs it was a disaster. There's a lot of people that just have old terrible jokes and it was just right. I was like, this is the store. It was very disappointing but the the place itself Oof Drew people that Drew people there. You knew that that was the place where the real Comics went and they made a career out of it. But the this world is different now like for a comic if you get a television show, it's actually like, oh you poor bastard like you crazy.


You could have had a podcast like you could have been okay, you could have been Your Own Boss you could have I mean and now a lot of comics are realizing they only want ads anymore. They was just want to do patreon. They want to just have have podcasts and put them out either for free and have you know, get you too bad. There's a lot of people trying to figure out what's the best way to be free, but for sure the best way to be freezing not to be connected to the Hollywood Machine because the Hollywood Machine is all woke now and it's completely ridiculous and everyone's full of shit and you we're not actors man. We're different things. All right, you know, it's cats and dogs living together the we're fucking different things, you know, we can act we can do it we both have but the reality is you're a common stand-up comedian.


Yes, and I am as well as a lot of us. There's a lot of us and we don't need Need that machine what we need is a machine that we create ourselves and when they did that a lot one of the reasons why the store works so well over the last few years because it was fueled by podcast. Yep. Real Blockhead fueled by everybody. Like I would tell people. Hey, you gotta see this kid Frank Castillo. He's hilarious. Tony Hinchcliffe this guys coming up Joey Diaz the funniest guy ever Ron Weiss the baddest motherfucker that ever lived all these people and we would all talk about these people and tell these crazy stories and then everybody would remember and then they would come we were they were they had International tourism. Tommy store people were fry flying in from Ireland and Australia should have been and they should have been right because that's how good those years were they would come in on a Tuesday and see one of the craziest lineups you've ever seen your fucking life.


Yeah you and I was in one day being you can you've got a million of these stories and it was it was you and Louis CK and Bill Burr and Madness and and me and it was just crazy over this one. He is mad this fuck. Yeah, crazy sadness in one trophy. Once your teen fucking dollars It's Magic. Do you know how much would it cost to put on that show and at the ranch nothing zero? Yeah, we're doing it for charity the red charity that's the idea is to do something at the ranch. We build a theater with the concerts for charity and then have a club in town.


Yeah. Oh satellite close all these places on 6th Street are going to go under unfortunately. Showing there's a lot of places that are going to go under because no one can work, you know, and I would love it if they all stayed open but some we're not going to be able to and so we'll scoop one of those. Yeah, there's going to be opportunities for you to put something in this town. That will matter. Yeah. Let me make a promise to my brother. I'll be there to support it. You know, he would have I don't do her anymore. I'll come to the club. Isn't this exciting talking about it? Really? You know, fuck it is fucking hating right? Yes. That's why I'm here. I'm like excited. Citing things all the things I'm interested in our exciting. I like bow hunting.


I like stand-up comedy. I like fighting all these things are exciting things right like exciting things and I think I can do something here. That's exciting. I like smoking pot watching cartoons and doing stand-up. I like smoking pot everything out. It's not like I would get nervous. I do. My favorite things about smoking pot is being paranoid. Yeah people the people get terrified of and they run away from it's one of my favorite parts of being high. I was I was nervous about coming and doing this. Showed really? Yeah, why Absalom my son I said, I don't know I've ever felt nerve I can walk on stage at Radio City Music Hall didn't leave, you know doesn't flutter. My butt is what I do and I'm ready to do it prepared to do it and I haven't even thought about interacting with anybody for you half a fucking year, you know, and so, you know, it's your new place and you're in town and but he goes dad.


He's your friend. He'll pull your right on through to the other side which of course, you know, we did we already weary through the others. Side Story 3 15. We're beautiful. It's beautiful. Perfect. It's wonderful. We covid tested clean is or fuck. Yeah, you know what? The funny thing is that I took the antibody test and then the no swab and so the antibody says said, you've never had it but you might have it. So I had to do the no swaps home or whatever two days, but the no swab the thing about the antibody test is two indicators. One of them is whether or not your body is currently fighting the virus, right? So there's one is whether or not you beat the virus and one. You're currently fighting the virus. So, you know, you're not currently fighting the virus that I feel good. So according to the doctor's a very low possibility that you have it and then we eliminate that with the swab right but not before you and I hug.


I don't give a fuck right I think vitamin D. I'll give you a ride. You ready coughing I'll give you a hug right and I've been coughing a little bit but this quantity myself for a couple weeks eat vitamin D gummies, right? All right, tell me which vitamin do you want me to take? I just want you take 5,000 IU's a day minimum. Um, that's what you should be taken. It's not that much and when you eat the I have these vitamin D. Gummies are the true all the time that there's like I think you think three of them. It's 5,000 IU's. It's not a big deal or small gummies. It tastes good. It's easy to do. Is there any carbs and I'm because I'm watching my car this probably like one gram of carbs. Now, they're probably gelatin now thing, right? That's it. That's horse move, right? Yeah. It's yeah, it's basically fingernails right and hair.


Yeah, it's good for you protein collagen. Yeah, not bad for you. So I'm in a good relationship. I really like no, you tell me I will go after that's exciting weekend it is it because you're always in these train wrecks. Right? And he actually she's really really really pretty she's my age and and I think that's important. Yeah, I've all I've never chased young women right much. You know, that doesn't much were they but she's a she came down. We started hanging out in the covid thing but wait, Seen each other before and and one night we go out to ATVs.


We have this really nice table. And Eddie V's is great. I love it. Yeah, that's a great old school plays. So we have this really cool table in the bars these two people. It's really cool. I'll show you the seat. You'll take your wife there on her nose big night. So and she's got a long black dress. I'm wearing a jacket and you know we go back to the my condo, which is a really nice pen house. With these gorgeous views and she her son and was a Grappler and her and her grandson is a Grappler and she was a gymnast. And she said for whatever reason she wanted fight.


I think I can take you down. Oh, no, and of course, that's how you break a hip. I laugh so hard that I couldn't she probably could have taken me down because he's five foot one. It's Jim is right. She's little bitty and I said, oh I could pick I would never ever hurt you for any reason. So if you want to come beat me up, come beat me up, but if I didn't care about hurting you I could throw you into that table because you're little and I'm big right right, then she attacked me. She did she came at me shove me back. And I mean a gymnast that does uneven parallel bars wrong like a chip.


I guess. You can't jump my chip. She was on me in my Center leg spray fucking pushing me back. Oh and I was like from now on. I'm only going to fuck women I could kill. I'm gonna say listless determine whether or not I could I'm never gonna do it, right? I would never hurt a woman, but what I would like to understand have the option if they went nuts and just jump my ass would be able to fucking beat it off and you know live, you know and provide and all those things that a man needs to do. I got a buddy of mine got obsessed with you just do when he dated a girl who was a black belt and they sparred and she tapped him easily.


Yeah, he was like what the fuck so he became obsessed with it because his girlfriend fucked him up. Right right defending himself. Right? Well Jiu-Jitsu is one of the rare martial arts were a woman really can kill you like 100% legit. Like if you graduate it's the same reason, I don't have a pet lion. That's I just don't need it in my house, right? I don't need to get my house. Yeah, I get it. Don't take it the wrong way. Ladies. I'm just saying, yeah. Those killer ladies out there like fuck right? What was wrong with me? I thought I had them tell you now. Yeah plan on Corner in them. Right baby. I know that you can still share and Bob at my ass right?


You can still wait till I fall asleep and I'm Raina, right Lorena Bobbitt. Was it the reign of Baba? Yeah, John Bobbitt and Lorena bobbitt's cut off his dick. Yeah cut his dick off we're asleep and then he stitched it back on and did porn right? You know, how good was that? So in job not good. It was like about how good I would sew it up. Yeah, I really didn't look good. I didn't see you know, looks like I know what you guys go down the rabbit hole you look at the video. I don't hear any of that stuff. I watch porn on my fucking iPad. That's all I do. I don't know any deeper than that pre Viagra porn too. So, you know because I didn't look that good to begin with no and it never really got hard. It was yeah. Oh it's a mess right sliced it off and threw on the side of the road. They had to wait a while before they found it.


And then I had to dust and dirt off of it darkness and darkness, right? Yeah. I just don't need that in my life. I don't need you to my life either way, but I've had it in my life. I've seen a lot of things I shouldn't have seen but someone sends me a link and Mike. All right, you're going in and see let's see. What's up. Somebody's over the house that no one day. I was at the radio station in New York and the guys showing me if you got a video of a guy fucking a snake and I'm like Okay. All right. Can I get a check? Please? Fucking snakes? That's gonna be the name of my next house. No, the so the check the snake pussy.


He is got a big anaconda. Wow. Okay. I'm sorry. I even said it. I'm sorry. I'm said it as he's fucking to snuck in here. Can you pull that up? I can't all right. Let's not show it but I'm just just you know you I guarantee this many people before him lived on people just go. Under Q whole Rat Hole, you know and yeah, they definitely do. Yeah, and if you can name it, there's a guy who's fucked it. Oh, yeah blenders guys have fucked blunders. Yeah, right tables chairs, right? That's why I have no balls. Anyway, it doesn't matter. Well, I'm not gonna go there. I'll get it. That's the problem with the internet you find out that you mean everybody knows someone who's a fucking moron, but you don't realize how many of them there are until you really go online and start searching, you know, I I was sitting in I was having this place worked on or out for Lemonade Stand Down to Van Zandt as a people five come up comic that I've known for years and one of them starts telling me a story about Hillary Clinton and her pedophile ring and I'm like what and this is probably three years ago and and how the pedophiles the far left right left wing in the David there.


There's a pedophile thing and I'm like, what are you talking about? And it was early? Q and on stuff it was those same conspiracies here theories that are coming out now I was here in those three years ago, and I thought it was just one person's I think where did you go to learn this Behavior? You know, we ever all behaviors learn right for sure. We're all a product of our environment like what environment did you put yourself in that made you think that this is true when the other day There were four of us playing golf and all four phones hit an amber alert at the same second. Yeah, and everybody knew exactly what it does.


We picked it up and I want there's a missing kid somewhere. And that's a beautiful fucking thing. Right? And but but now there's these pedophile rings and Tom Hanks is a what the fuck? I don't think the Tom Hanks things true. I think there's a lot of people that are just really dumb and they get involved in conspiracy theories and they believe everything and there's a lot of people out there that are sewing misinformation is a bunch of Russian trolls and body counts and a lot of chaos and sowing seeds of doubt in our democracy and life in general and trying to tell you that It is all the elites are fucking lizard people that are running things behind closed doors with Satan.


But for sure there's guys out there that have fucked a lot of young girls. That's for sure. Yeah, and that's what that Epstein shits all about. And that's what's so spooky about it was that its prominent politicians and scientists and celebrities and they all flew out to fuck Island and it's real right and then when the guys in custody with fucking security cameras and the whole deal he hangs himself Self in a way that's physically impossible. Yeah. Yeah and everybody's like, well no more need for further investigation. It's unnecessary key, if it was anybody else involved in any other thing they died in that way we would look deeply into it. But they've basically just just tried to let it go past in the new cycle, but with no one's thinking about it anymore or you know, the interview that branch and rewrite what yeah, it was there.


You see that interviewing they have you known him. In the reason he thought he could pull that off as because for years. He's been royalty, right? So everybody around him or just yes, man. So he's got footman and whatever they're all going exactly Raza and I know I can't believe someone would make these kind of accidents against you that seems like thank you agree normal behavior exactly. How are you? But turns out the news people weren't those people at? All, right. And how do you not see that coming you idiot motherfucker? Because he's an idiot motherfucker, right? The only reason why he's in that position at all. As one of his uncle's find one of his aunts. And then yeah right of Labor blah blah blah and then you re means bloodline thing. It's not like an earned position because you've really worked really hard to get there.


You don't become a prince because you've kicked ass here at you kick Prince asked and for years, maybe even get a PhD in princedom know you just became your friends for your whole life man. No shot. Absolutely, sir. How about that Prince Harry and Megan Markle is that crazy? Like it's crazy that it's on the news. Every fucking day. It's important everything they do. It's important. It's important to everyone left the castle. Oh we had to go. Why do they do it? I probably a crazy. I can tell you why they let it go because there's no way you could bring an outsider into that world and have them do anything. Oh, they signed a megawatt Netflix deal, but they didn't what are you doing?


I don't have you learned Netflix. You've made some big boo boos. Stop it Netflix if you think about me. Making decisions like this. Call me up. First me. No, I'm talking to Netflix Oh, I'll get them high and I'll pull them aside and go. Listen. This is not going to work. You can spend a lot of money right now. I'm just like clockwork by another Ron White special. That's what I'm talking about. Yeah, what what these people are is like this. They're good for Snippets in the news. They're good for you. Look into Google news feed like what are they doing their ex their extradited from the kingdom? No one cares about them anymore Gear Well hundred percent wrong. I think that they people will watch this. Crap, no matter how bad it is if it's connected to this guy and this woman people will watch it and they will continue to fucking go.


Oh my God, look at the Kardashians, you know you they're not a talent one any of those people. Did you watch her sex tape? Huh? You talking all this shit. Do you watch her sex tape? No. Well, you should have then you wouldn't be saying she doesn't have any Talent really was a good very good. How was it? Yeah dizzy aesthetic. I watch that. Paris Hilton lame little I think with I think that family all bullshit aside. No jokes is the mother is very skillful in the way. She's managed them. That's what it is. Well sometimes being honest about it because nothing works better than this, you know, I was doing a show at the Improv or at the bop bop bop a mirage and they had that little Kardashian T-shirt shop.


Yeah right there as you remember that hmm, one of the ones you haven't even heard of What's going to be there? And there was a line 300 yards long to get into this. What's now a soap shop and I walked by that that's where I work. I'm there 10 weekends a year more than anybody and that's my place and I stay in a villa right back there and one day I walk in there. I'm just looking around the car - you don't see what they got you got towels with Kim's like this and stuff on it and they said sir. You can't come in here with a beverage. I'm like, what do you think? I'm going to spill a Coke on your towel. Okay, I think you could probably but anyway, they made me leave and they fucking made me leave.


It'll be quite frankly. Well, it's they've figured out a way to keep people interested and keep people talking about them. And yeah, it's I just want to do what is good. They are I just got through doing it. Yeah, we're helping them and then the mother to but but here's the thing about Kim. She's done some legitimate amazing work in getting people out of jail that were wrongly accused. Yes, and that's why I don't make fun of Anymore except that thing I said about her sex tape, but other than that, I thought you were saying something really nice about her sex tape. You weren't dishing it that you were saying I felt like that to you but don't have it. Thank you very much, but she's really done a lot of like legitimate good to help people get released from prison that were wrongly accused.


Well, you know what the problem that I think sometimes I talk about things and I don't know jack shit about him. I just make up a funny thing to see to head and then later I end up going well fuck really I didn't know she did that me too, but I did. I saw the woman that she helped get out of prison and I thought that was like yeah, we've had a couple guys from the Innocence Project on here. This is probably loved ya series know it's it's amazing and she's a douchebag that guy that was doing the tooth my fucking pussy. It was on that. He was convicting people from tooth to tooth by him. Yes doesn't work, but there wasn't a bottom imprint and there he was in him to prison and let the other guy who was killing kids go.


Yeah, it was good. Well Josh Dubin who's one of the guys has been on this podcast before he has a podcast called junk science. It's about the Innocence Project about wrongly convicted people because of junk science about like bite marks that well there. It is. Wrongful conviction junk science bite mark evidence and this is this is Josh do but who's been on the podcast before that guy made me cry like a baby tell me some stories about People getting out of jail that were wrong. I wasn't trying to make you cry, but I could have you know, but I just chose not to okay. I got took I'm taking it to different directions you threatening me. I'm not threatening Joe.


I'm just saying that if I wanted to make you cry right here in public like you were crying that night at The Improv and whoever your tier 2 reg tell me about Austin, where am I gonna go? I'ma come with I don't know if I could live in Texas, but I have to move everything but have to move but it's too hard. I'll be there. I was all-in dude there. I was always so fucking thrilled. I might I was with you heard the news coming out of my fucking voice the day I found out that Joe was coming to town and like and and then I write you know what I knew Jay was coming, but I know he's I don't know if he's really coming because nobody I talked him into it somebody Mama T sell their property over there. They're just getting a place over here those cells probably there eventually I might come on man.


What about you? You stole my place? Yeah. Yeah. I think I'm seeing here. I like it a lot I felt. Real comfortable real quick real quick. I'm only been here a little over a week, right? I fuckin love rewrite your brand-new your new meat already got a studio. I'm all set up. You got a badass Studio. You got jet ski, I think you could have built it in an Airstream, you know, it's save the money that could have right but it's a move that around. You know, I feel like this is a better spot for me. And again, it's like practicing what I preach. I don't think we need to be connected to that machine out there that Hollywood Machine itself. We know you don't know. It does right. They don't serve bandwidth, right?


Yeah same thing you could do it from anywhere. It's that you can do it from anywhere, but it's also what really serves the comics what really serves the comics is the podcast industry the podcast industry goes where the podcasters go, right? So let's bring them all here. Yeah, you always have the ability to move my number, you know by saying something on the Internet which you are always willing to do and and you can see it and you have people coming up. Yeah heard on the road. Yeah. Well my good. Yeah, I'm good. Sometimes you're just lucky right? I'm lucky. You're my friend. A lot of guys that were friends of Letterman got to do Letterman all the time because they were his friends right whether they were that good or not. They got to do it over and over and over and over and over. You know, I've watched a few of your podcast.


Everybody was more interesting to me. You know, I used to be a comic you keep saying that I used to be a comic to that's horseshit your comic your Ron fucking white man. Don't ever say that you need to stop saying that once I get you up at the club. Come on, man. You gonna Crush You tell that story about those that's what I'm waiting for. I waited for the right. I'm waiting for the club. Once it stops us. They will come as soon as we get this mayor out of office. Just kidding as soon as we figure it out a way to open up these Chloe have a meeting under the bridge. Yeah, we know we got a bunker. We don't need to go to the bridge. We just need to get good clubs open test as soon as they come up with rapid testing and some more tenable therapeutic.


You're right. Yeah. You're right. We'll be all right. People want to go out and they miss it. They miss it that I miss it. I miss sitting in the club watching other Comics. I almost as much as I miss doing stand-up. I miss it everybody. But the in people that are just fans. I just have regular jobs that used to love date night go out there a comedy club have a great fucking time have a few drinks laughter ass off. They miss it. But we're going to add badass barbecue to that. Fuck. Yeah. That's not like yeah. You got it. Yeah, we used to make weed legal here. God damn it for evil. I know it's Kyle eagle. All we have to do is continue to work in that direction because it's a process of evolution right? I thought I thought that Texas would probably sell medical marijuana before Oklahoma because there's so much more conservative it seems yeah, but now it's flourishing like crazy.


Yeah and the money to get out of it right a big boxes that need the money because of oil but and just other things but but eventually it's going to make sense to You know, they're there it'll be laughed upon in 15 years or 10 years or five years as a Prohibition. That was so fucking stupid like it is in California like it is in California, you know, if you can't even imagine I remember the day that I lived in I moved the Montecito. I'm down to his head shop. I'm going to buy a piece. I just bought this house with big view of the world and there's a gather with the skateboard. He was waiting he was going to open in 15 minutes and he goes there you you got your license.


You're going to get pick up some of my herbs. And I'm like what and then I spit 20 minutes going. What what as he explained to me that marijuana was legal in California. I didn't even know it and he goes yeah, what you do is you go down he goes, where's your license? It's Lana because that's okay. Just got out of there apply for a license. I'll give you a paper license take that to this doctor in one hour. You'll be back here open that door. There's 15 Kendall. What? What are you fucking for? What are you kidding me? And I walked in there and he wasn't kidding it was Fucking 15 Tons of gorgeous Bud Ice Cream that made you want potato chips, right? I'm getting fatter for sure and all the hash hash will all this stuff and I buy all of it that's been to Grant and I do I was spent $2,000 and I go back up to the house.


I'm there by myself and I got my new bong. I'm pouring this and there's taking this hit that hit off this he some of this fucking ice cream, which they didn't put a real dosage on you know, but I I'm so fucking and then I start feeling weird. Right and I go wash my face and I lay in my bed and I started going - you the Trap it's a trap the drugs here. It's going to ruin my life. I should take all that. We noticed the flush it down the toilet. I'm going to go get this horse and I like an hour later. I mean they're going so what else we got in here. Don't do it all because that doesn't work and it's but get past the rough spot, right? Yeah, but I always like to get You fucked up and come down a little bit right to got to wander into a buzz that way but when you come down a little bit you feel real thankful.


You're not as fucked up as you were in our right? Yeah, and I hope an hour from now. Yeah, you know, I have those feelings. Yes, that's good feelings good feelings of survival. I think you have to feel like you're gonna die. I'd really appreciate being alive, right? You know, I've I've had some really fucking low spots in my life and in the touring career when literally I had joint custody of my son when he was two and a half years old and they were like, okay, here you go, and I'm like, oh Nobody's going with me. Another than I did have a baby and that's it. I'm like, okay. I have a van and I plot Marshall down in the in a car seat next to me in the van and go.


Okay. Here we go. And and we took off across the fucking country and going to comedy clubs literally. I would walk up to wager says before I went on stage and went could you just hold him for about 45 minutes and really and as he be out there being held by wager. Is it while I'm up on stage doing stand-up comedy? That's crazy. And I'll tell you the funniest thing is he's a brilliant young man. And but here's how smart he is. We're at the South County Funny Bob and and he goes dad because every once in a while, I'd bring him on stage right and there's my baby. Get that vote right as an easy vote to get and he goes dad.


I want to come to the club tonight, but I don't want to go on stage. I just want to hang out in the green room. And I said this club doesn't have a green room because it's a funny bone, right? How amazing is is the put that together that funny bones are shitholes don't have fucking green rooms, right? He's the one Columbus doesn't write none of them do And he realized that it two and a half years old to have your little area. Yeah, it's a funny bone. He's two and a half. Oh my God, that's funny. But that's how you know, that's how he's raised and I took him down to Mexico when I started making pottery and his mom who lives if you lived in Mexico for a while, right?


But this is before he Collar Comedy took off right before right before what brought you to Mexico. I'm impetuous dude. I would the funny bone cut my pay by a third because they realized they could and and and really they took away a lot of the airfare. So it was really almost half and and I told him to go eat a steaming bowl of fuck and and my girlfriend at the time was a artist sort of person and she was doing this mosaic tile application to pottery and then she would take it to these. Fares or whatever and sell it and she sell it all in two hours.


But the fares three days it took her six months to make it and so I thought why wouldn't you just go to Mexico and hire a bunch of women to sit around and she orchestrated and they sit around and make this pottery and then you have a bunch of cell and that was the whole concept and so I went down there and I had I was living on the Lake LBJ. We're right up from you and sold that house and and I had the biggest truck Rider makes pull. The biggest trailer Rider makes and I had my van that Marshall had toured in and the biggest trailer that they make behind that that was everything around and we went straight down in McAllen, Texas and moved into a trailer and then we moved then I found a place in Mexico in Reynosa Mexico where Abraham answer is who's a great golfer who I love to follow and we moved into Mexico met a woman named your Munos and here mama knew everybody.


She was like the matriarch of the Subdivision there and there was a tortilla factory that have been abandoned. I rented it for $100 a month and it was a wreck and had eight inches of cat shit in it. They went in there and cleaned it all up and we started fucking make a pottery and watery pottery and I remember that two of the may have been the two sons of night Whitney remove one of the employees were little kids and they were Marshall was five or six and and they They were four and three or whatever and they were fighting and Marshall went out on the front porch and went all toe and because that was the word he knew and but they didn't stop but he's he still knew how to command them to stop.


And so we had a glorious laughs. I spent my evening as fucking saw and tables and build and shit and they were making pottery and I was sweating. How old are you back then? Forty two or three maybe getting that crazy. So you'd toward and you'd kind of like settled into this idea that I'm just going to be here in Mexico making Pottery. Yeah. Yeah, but you know, but Foxworthy and I were had been friends for already very my Matt Foxworthy first day I did stand-up so so he goes, why don't you come with me on the weekends and and open for me in the Big Show's right? So he'd gotten big enough to take somebody with him and he picked me to take with him. And so I would go I'd make more money than I ever really made before my life opened up for Foxworthy on the weekends, and then I'd flat back.


From we'd be on a private jet and then we fly back to Atlanta and then I get on a plane to Houston to McAllen, Texas and drive across and to Mexico. If I ever told you the Tomato story no. So my mother grows these amazing tomatoes that were so good though, the property she lived on which was imbued of which is just south of here was a peach tree orchard at one time at a cattle farm at one time, but the soil produced a tomato that you could just eat over the sink like a apple. They were so good and clearly the best. I'd ever eaten and Foxworthy was so in love with these tomatoes that he would call.


His mother would send him a box of tomatoes their ears. When is it Tomatoes come use the ripening on the vine? Okay, you'll get your Tomatoes when you get your tomatoes and I'd been out on a run. I picked up a comedy club that wasn't a funny bone and then a couple Foxworthy day. So I was gone for two weeks and mother sent me the box of tomatoes and all the money that I've made I already owe to the people that work for me, right and that didn't owe it to him, but it was coming up right? I was gone. I don't have any money. And so I stopped in McHale at the post office and they bring out a big old soggy fucking box. And I know what it is. I know my mother sent me the tomatoes and they went rotten in the fucking post office while I was out doing stand-up, right?


So I said ask Tomatoes, you know throw it away. And and so I get in line. I'm exhausted. I've been traveling all day long literally all night and all day. We had done a show in Seattle flow back on a private plane to Atlanta to Houston hand well, You know just beat up. And I get over to my house and the phone rings and it's my mom and and she goes did you get the tomatoes and I said mother I've been gone for two weeks and the tomatoes were rotten. She goes at least you got $200. I get back in my car drive back to America drive to the fucking post office. Go back to the dumpster fucking open the lid crawl in it and start rubbing through the fucking rubbish till I found that box ripped it open and got that hundred dollars.


In my pocket and went back fucking home. That's how much I needed a hundred dollars. Wow, dig through a dumpster to get it and if I forget where we were at read before that, but if you were in Mexico and that's you were doing Pottery. Yeah opening for Jeff Fox. Yeah, and then it will basically then, you know, the Blue Collar Comedy Tour came up, you know the because the Kings of Comedy were doing such huge numbers and he was like, you know, why don't you why don't we do another version of that, you know for different, you know Marketplace and and he told me the concept of the four of us going out but I didn't really know what the Kings comedy were doing, you know when playing golf with him back then ends and they're making Potter in Mexico your Pottery Mexico.


The beautiful stuff is a pre-internet turned out it was heavy and fragile, which is a horrible combination. That way I really hadn't thought of that. I didn't really think the whole thing through I was like, what about this this it is crazy the little pop for you at 42. Well, probably 40, you know, 4445 and before that came out, right we did it and but that was all Jeff's money, right? They be paid me great to do it, but it was his thing right it would have been nothing without him ever. We couldn't have sold ticket one without Foxworthy in the hand, even though it was just ding ball. It would didn't work at all. We try. And it what we just cut together make it all the money out of it and give the money.


Okay. Nobody shows up. So yeah, so he's I think Fox was is one of the most underrated Comics ever. I really do that. You might be a redneck series something. Yes. Brilliant. Yeah, if your family tree does not Fork, right and it was all so long. I mean those jokes were so long ago, but it was such a great hook. Changes do it over and over and over and over but there was so much to him besides that right into this day. You know it he's just somebody that when I talked to him we were both doing little clubs in Atlanta warming up for something else.


And so we had dinner together and you know, I don't know eight months ago or whatever it was and and it was just glorious to sit down and talk to somebody that was so generous that the first day I ever did stand up. He told me I I needed to put the punch line at the end of the joke. And then I said how you do that. Alright, whatever stupid fucking voice I was using that day and and he sits down with me brand new comic with a piece of paper and a fucking penny goes. All right. How's the first Peter Jo go he writes it out himself in longhand and he he underlines this part and this part in this part goes your what you're doing is instead of saying this here. You need to say it here, right?


Because if you say it here your step. On the left by doing the end of it now I can't imagine now how you would do that wrong or not how to do not know how to do it, but I didn't know how to do it then and he was so generous. He just sat down and showed me. I've been doing stand-up for four minutes and he and I had a guy that good going. Okay. Look at this just like amazing. Just think about this. If you do it here instead of here what happens stare at them they'll laugh and then you can move on to the next fucking Channel. Wow, so that's how that's how much easier I'm never heard anything but good things about that math. There's nothing there's nothing but good, you know great human being dear dear friend count on him for anything.


He's a big-time bowhunter to you know, he's big-time Hunter. He he he and everybody respects him as a hunter, you know, he doesn't take out a lot of deer during the year, you know, he looks for trophies and if he doesn't see him, he doesn't shoot Adam, you know, he does old mature deer there. Raster breed and say yeah, that's what it looks for. That's how you're supposed to do it and you know, and I've never been into that. He's always trying to get me to go and I would probably go with him. I mean, I have no reason not to you know, except that learn how to shoot a bow. You should come out here and we should shoot some pegs. They have to get rid of them. These wild crazy pigs.


So the pigs. Yeah the pics don't think about Whitney's Pig put that in the back your head. So Jay and I were going to do it was the hanging judge Jeff there is What's he doing in this video? Jamie wanting something? That's nice, dear. Yeah, it's out there. Whack and dear. So anyway, Jay and I were going to talk we're talking about doing who was the judge west of the Pecos here where I being weird being and so we were talking to this director.


I feel stupid friend those names of famous director lives right here in Bastrop who did Shit my brains just not working today. I can't catch up with all of it. And but he owns the he he actually had also some pigs that he put into this and he wanted to reality show about the pig Ranch and Bastrop and so J because he can produce anything right? He's got a great production company and so he sells it because this guy is the director. Fuck. Who's his name? Oh, I can't believe I'm sorry. Give me a movie. the first movie that McConaughey was ever guessing on this.


Last day Richard linklater. Yeah, I'm Jamie right out of the fucking gate. He's a mentalist. So we pitch him the Judge Roy Bean story, but Jays there to wrap up the deal on the pig Ranch the Pig Rescue, right? So we they want to go over there. Well now I'm part of the fucking team right? I'm like fuck here because I want this guy distracted right? Because he does it. It's a hit Basalt pressure. He's an amazing director. And we go over there and it's huge and it's nice to the pigs are 800 pounds.


Some of them can't hardly move have arthritis takes him 30 minutes to lay down the last big and this is the thing know something different. Well now that's not the last Pig good luck with that. There's a lot of pigs. But anyway, we make our way around the whole thing and they have footage because you know, they have all these cameras out of pigs that are in the wild walking up to the fence going. Hey get in here. They're fucking eating sandwiches and shit laying around in the mud. There's a people pigs outside the gates going. What the fuck is this? I want in our you can't get here. If you let wild pigs in if there were vert to being like domestic pigs because if you take domestic pigs and they go wild like you were talking about your friends pigs, they did right tusks.


Yeah, and they Refined. Yeah, I don't know but we anyway we make our way into the house with it, which the guy that runs it is a runs a big construction companies got a lot of money but his wife looks like the chick from Pulp Fiction that goes nuts that has all the piercings and stuff and oh, yeah, and I when I walked into that environment I saw her and I'm like she's set to pop she's a ton of don't do it. So yeah, she's about to pop a fucking weasel. Right?


And I think that's my feeling about the whole situation and we get in the house and they're going to sit down and talk about this deal. We set out for about three seconds you goes here. She walks out the door slams the door and I was like, I saw that fucking coming I didn't tell anybody right, but I did see if I can tell him. This girl's about to pop I've seen it. I've seen it, you know crazy, right? You've been around crazy and then he goes She's not coming back and I'm like she didn't look like she was coming back. She looked like she was anyway, I said, well, I'm gonna they said some of the whether you talk about the deal and I got a joint my pocket happened.


I smoke four fucking hours and we got yeah, I'll just be right outside here and the smoke but before they did that there were four pigs that lived in the house and one of them was Whitney Cummings Pig and they brought Whitney Cummings pig out to me and get and I held it in. Squeal like I was fucking it, but I totally wasn't I thought we was it but won't we I definitely did not wash that man. Fuck my wife. No, I already don't believe you. I already don't believe you that's a powerful statement.


So anyway, let's wrap it up. We did it wrap it up. We did it brother. A beautiful podcast. Thank you. Thanks for making me come here. Yeah, part of the reason a you know, you I needed to stop you from crying. I'm like, I'll make some promises. I'll pitch him, you know do my thing. I knew there was a spot we could be together. Yeah. Yeah. I was trying to steal you back from McGraw. You know, I'm like my true friends kind of went off together. And then that's the way it now turns out he's moving down here okay case with us to all be cases when it's legal and I got nothing to do. You got something to do once the branch opens up?


Yeah, absolutely. I want to do with your four acres and two mules. Yeah. I love you Ron way. I love you. Joe Rogan. All right. Bye everybody. Good night. Whoo, thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you to expressvpn. They protect 100% of your data with best-in-class encryption rated number one VPN by CNET and wired available on all your devices go to expressvpn.com Rogan and you can get an extra three months for free on a one-year package that's exp.


Ress VP. And.com Rogan expressvpn.com / Rogan go there and get hooked up. We're also brought to you by whoop the fitness tracker that I wear every single day. It's on my wrist right now. It's fucking awesome. It gives you so much data. It's so good at keeping you honest and letting you know where your body is at how well rested you are how how much you can push it during the day no more guesswork. Whoop lets you know, and whoop is going to offer you a sweet deal 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout go to whoop.


That's wh oop.com whoop.com enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15% sleep better recover faster and train smarter optimize your performance with whoop. We're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app. That's right. The cash app download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today and when you download the cash app enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word, you will receive ten dollars and the cash app will send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Ren's fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo and we're brought to you by Roca the best motherfucking I wear on the planet.


They build the best shit the It fits in your head perfect. It's so light there. So Crystal Clear and they're gonna hook it up Rogue is going to offer you 20% off your first purchase. Just enter Rogan at checkout. That's our o Ka Roca.com enter Rogan at checkout. You will save 20% off your first purchase of the best motherfucking. I wear on the planet Earth check them out. They're the shit. Alright friends. We did it two episodes in the book. This one got loose. This one felt good. This one felt like a real old-school podcast. Like it just seamless the first one. I was like, I'm in Texas yikes, but I think we got through that but this this one felt like a hundred percent legit.


If you're listening to this, you're listening on either iTunes or some other podcasts application that's using the RSS feed as of December 1st. It won't be available anywhere else except Spotify. So if you want to get the audio as of December 1st, we will be Spotify. Only it's free. Just download Spotify and Bam you're back in business. Okay. Thank you. Love y'all.