
Hello, friends. Welcome to the show. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Squarespace. Squarespace is a place where you can make a website. If you need a website, you no longer have to hire anyone to do it. It's the place where my website was made. Go to joe rogan.com. That's a Squarespace website. Squarespace has got it dialed in. You don't have to know anything like normal stuff. Can you move a file around on your desktop? That's all you need to know. It's that simple. They've got it figured out. They have a simple, easy to use, drag and drop user interface and be t filled designer templates that will allow anyone to make a fantastic professional website.


Each website comes with a free online store. So during these crazy times, if you're thinking about starting up a business, Squarespace is your Huckleberry. They got powerful e-commerce functionality that lets you sell anything online, and you can customize the look, the feel of settings, the products, and more with just a few clicks. It's super convenient. Everything is optimized for mobile. Right out of the box. You got built-in search engine optimization, free and secure hosting nothing to patch or upgrade ever. And 24 7 award-winning customer support, and they're gonna let you try it for free. Ooh, head on over to squarespace.com/joe for a free trial.


Then when you are ready to launch your new beautiful website, use the offer code Joe to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. We're also brought to you by Rev Town Jeans. Rev Town has created the holy grail of jeans. They are the only jeans that I wear. They got it fucking nailed. I'm wearing them right now. I wear 'em all the time. If you see me wearing jeans, I'm wearing Rev Town jeans. They've got it. A perfect combination of a gene that looks good, but feels like yoga pants. They've got the perfect amount of stretch and the perfect amount of durability. They just dialed it in. Okay. For the last 50 years, if you wanted to wear jeans, it was either some jeans that were too big so that your legs can move around in them, or they were stiff and you had to shove your body into 'em and you couldn't move anywhere.


Well, rev Town figured it out. They were created by a couple of guys who started at Under Armor, so they know about that stretchy scientific fiber shit for making world class performance, workout clothes and leggings, and other such gear. Well, they partnered with this old school denim designer in Milan, Italy to create jeans that look and feel and fit amazing. But when you're wearing them, you can move around in them like you're wearing a pair of sweats at 79 bucks a pair. They're less than half the price of some of those so-called designer jeans we've been jamming our junk into for years. They're fucking awesome. Pick up a pair at rev town.com/rogan.


They got something special just for you guys listening right now. Go. Go on over to rev town.com/rogan. And bonus Rev Town now ships internationally so you get 'em delivered to your doorstep no matter where you live. Head over to rev town.com/rogan to upgrade your denim game today. I'm wearing 'em right now. Rev town.com/rogan we're also brought to you by Simply Safe. Simply Safe, and they're fantastic. Home security. There's almost always a rise in break-ins during the holiday kids, and it's why Simply Safe Home Security is having a huge holiday sale, 40% off any simply Safe system and a free security camera.


Recently, US News and World Report called it the Best Home Security of 2020. So whether you're traveling or staying put for the holidays, check out the 40% off plus free security camera deal before it ends. This week, it won C Net's Editor's Choice for Home Security. It was named the best in 2020 by Forbes and Popular Mechanics. And their system has an arsenal of sensors and cameras that protect every inch of your home. You can set it up yourself in about 30 minutes. It's super easy. Plus there's no contract, no hidden fees, and no installation costs. Then simply Safe Security Specialists takeover monitoring your home around the clock and ready to send emergency help any moment there's an alarm.


So get 40% off Simply Safe, plus a free security camera today by visiting Simply safe.com/rogan. Hurry this deal expires on Friday. That's simply safe.com/rogan. Simply safe.com/rogan. And we're also brought to you by Casper and their fantastic mattresses. Ooh, it's holiday season kids. It's all about the bedroom. And Casper's Black Friday sale has up to 30% off everything you need to make your bedroom your happy place. The most supportive mattresses, plush, pillows, soft sheets, even cozy throw pillows and blankets so you better get Gifting.


Casper's Black Friday sale is on now with up to 30% off for a limited time@casper.com. Casper's mattresses are made with 86 supportive gel pods to align your spine and eliminate aches and pains. It's the supportive comfort that you need to wake up refreshed and ready to go. Casper's bed frames are made from the highest quality materials to ensure that your frame stays looking like new. Even after years of use. The Haven bed frame is made with premium felted wool for a soft and sophisticated look. Ooh, did you know that Casper also has bedroom accessories?


That's right from their warm magic glow light to their calming weighted blanket, even a dog bed. For your best friend, Casper has cozy gift ideas. For everyone that you know, give the gift of a better bedroom, save up to 30% during Casper's Black Friday sale on now@casper.com. Terms and conditions apply. See casper.com/terms for more details. My guest today is the CEO of Whole Foods and an author of several books, including Conscious Capitalism and Conscious Leadership. And this is what we really got into with the ideas of socialism and Marxism on the rise today.


He, he went into depth about why he believes that capitalism and especially capitalism with good ethics is the best thing for the world. We got to talking about all kinds of good stuff. It went long. This is a good one. I really enjoyed his company. I really enjoyed talking to him. We, we even had disagreements. Ooh, but I like them a lot. Please welcome the great and powerful John Mackie, Joe Rogan podcast, checking out The Joe Rogan experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. Hello, John. Hey, Joe, Nice to meet you. Likewise. Thank you for welcoming me to Austin and thanks for the food. No one's ever brought me food here.


I'm a grocer. That's what I do. I know, but you, you brought me actual frozen meat, so thank you very much. Frozen meats, some vegan cheese. Yeah, that will go to friends. It's really good. It's really good. Does it taste Taste good or is it good for you? It Both. It's just made strictly out almonds. That's all that's there. Oh, really? Yeah. Taste it. It's a cream cheese with chives in it. It's delicious. I really just like almonds. Can I just have almonds? You can, but, but you'll like the cheese. Give it a try. I know you're an open-minded man. Yeah, I am. I'll try, I'll try your vegan cheese. Okay. But you, you're sending me mixed signals. You gave me frozen elk meat and vegan cheese. I'm, you know, covering all bases.


What I want to talk to you about, well, first of all, you have a book out. The book is Conscious Capitalism. No. That book that's out is Conscious Leadership, which, which is a sequel to, you already have that book. Right? But I have this one right here. Yeah. Cuz I brought that today And Conscious Leadership, a sequel to Conscious Capitalism. Right. That for a lot of people, those are, that's an oxymoron. That's jumbo shrimp or military intelligence. Right. Conscious capitalism. Today in this, in this day and age, this very strange time, there's a large seg, I shouldn't say a large segment, but it's a very squeaky wheel. There's a segment of our culture that thinks that capitalism is evil. Yeah. I'm not in that. I'm not in that classification.


In fact, I think the opposite. I think capitalism's the greatest thing humanity's ever done, it's been capital. If you go back just 200 years ago when capitalism was really getting going, 94% of the people alive on the planet Earth lived on less than $2 a day. And that's adjusted for inflation. 94%. Today it's under 10%. If you go back 200 years ago, the average lifespan was 30. Now it's 72.6. We're heading in the advanced countries. It's about 80 illiteracy rates 200 years ago where 88% of the world couldn't read. Now, it's now the 12%. But can you attribute that solely to capitalism or wouldn't you attribute that to innovation and technology?


And That's the right name for capitalism. It's Carl Marks called it capitalism. What it really is, a better name, which we talked about in conscious leadership, is innovationism continuous innovation is how humanity progre progresses. But it's it's business that takes the innovations of science and puts them into forms that create value for other people. So it's, it's, it's, it's been capitalism or innovationism that's lifted humanity out of the dirt that's transforming our world, even as we speak. It's amazing. Just what's happened in the last, in my lifetime, it's astounding all the progress that humanity's made. And we're going through a tough year right now. So it doesn't work in a perfect linear line.


But the trend lines are clear. The, the book I always try to get everybody to read is Stephen Pinker's book Enlightenment. Now, you ever take a look at that book? No, I haven't, but I'm a big fan of a lot of his work. Yeah. That book just documents. It's just unbelievable how he documents progress since the enlightenment. It's incredible. The, the problem that a lot of people have with capitalism is they, they attribute capitalism to, to greed, attribute greed and the problems of the world and environmental destruction and ignoring climate change. And they attribute that to capitalism. And they think that the way out of this is socialism, some type of socialism.


But in my opinion, the people that are saying that, they, I don't think they, I don't, I don't think there's anything wrong with contributing and contributing to a better community in terms of making healthcare more affordable or free making education more affordable or free. But you gotta, human beings need incentives in order to perform. And that's, that's just human nature, whether we like it or not. If you want a system that allows for a continual progress of, in innovation, like constant innovation, you gotta give people incentives to do that. They have to incentive just the human animal strives to achieve for whatever reason.


Totally Agree. I mean, it's not like socialism hasn't been tried. Yeah. In the last a hundred years, 42 countries have tried socialism and there have been 42 failures. Isn't it amazing that it's still popular Because people just believe, well, because a new generation doesn't know their history. Yeah. And they just believe it hasn't been done right yet. Yes. It'll this time give me the power and I'll make sure it gets done right. Yeah. But it can't be done. Right. It's intrinsically flawed and they fall back on the Scandinavian argument. What about Sweden and Denmark and Norway? But those, those, if you look at the Economic Freedom Index, those are some of the most capitalistic countries in the world there.


And, and the economic Freedom Index, for example, Denmark's listed one place below the United States. It's like number 12. Sweden's like number 20. United States is like number 13 or 14. So Iceland is even is the freest of those Scandinavian countries. So Sweden's held up as a, as an example. But what people don't realize is the corporate income taxes in Sweden are only 21%. They have no inheritance taxes at all. They have universal vouchers for education. So free competition and education, not a monopoly. They do, they are probably in a lot of ways, more capitalistic than Americans are. So what is it that they use, they, they point to when they talk point to these Scandinavian countries?


What are they using it as an example of them being a shining light of socialism In some sense? They're still stuck in the sixties when Sweden did an experiment with socialism before it moved away from it. They're still living in the sixties, and yet they tried it and their economy tanked. When did they try, how'd they try it? They, they, they socialized industry. They, they, they, they had government own the means of productions in most of these large corporations. And they had very high business taxes. And they, a lot of people like beyond Borg is a good example. It was driven outta Sweden or, or Ingmar bur and driven out for unbelievably high taxes.


So, hey, just like you've been driven outta California. Yeah. I wasn't driven out of it because of that. If California was still open the way Texas is, I would've stayed. I saw the writing on the wall with many things. One of 'em was that they were closing restaurants and bars and comedy clubs, and they weren't closing them in other states. And I, I didn't, I didn't think that they were recognizing that there's, there's an impact health-wise, but there, there's also a health impact if you destroy the economy and that, that impact, like, you're not people that get covid. Most people survive. Right. When your economy tanks and 40 plus percent of your businesses are gone.


I don't think economically you're gonna bounce back nearly as well. I think, I think it's a very dangerous place to be like Los Angeles right now. If you're a a business owner, it's a dangerous place to be because all of a sudden governors are acting like autocrats and they're, they're, I mean, there, there was a recent ruling right, where he lost in court because they, he's passing legislation on his own. He's making mandates on his own that the rest of the state doesn't agree with and they're not going through the normal process. Right. And they've stopped him from doing that now. But look, they, they still just put it, they imposed a curfew in Los Angeles of 10:00 PM Just a just random curfew.


Like what is, how is that stopping? All you're doing is limiting people. You're you're limiting free. You're not, there's no emphasis whatsoever on strengthening people's immune system. Right. Or on health and all this emphasis on tanking the, the economy. Yeah. All this emphasis on closing businesses down. And I just saw the writing on the wall. Yeah. And I'm like, this place is fucking doomed. I think you're, I think you're telling the truth there, Joe. I agree. I just can't believe that. See, before it didn't matter that much who your governor was or who your mayor was, when everything was going well, people didn't think about it that much.


You know, you would be like, oh, you know, the mayor, whatever the fuck his name is, he's kind of goofy. Who cares? Let's go to work. And you would just do your normal thing. Go, this is America. How bad can they fuck this up? And then you realize in time of crisis, when they assume these powers that they never had before, and then you realize how insanely hypocritical they are. Well, thankfully, our governor, the governor of California, not my governor anymore. I got a Texas license. Now gimme some knuckles. Congratulations. Thank you. But when they caught him at that restaurant, the French laundry, right. You know, eating with no mask on inside, no social distancing, all the things that he tells everybody to do, tells everybody to put a mask on in between your bites of food.


And then he is not doing it himself. You're like, right. Okay. This is, this is exactly like his Aunt Nancy Pelosi, when she got busted going to a beauty parlor with no mask on while they were all closed down. They, it's rules for you, but not rules for them. And it's, it's disgusting. Right? I mean, is it really about the covid or is it about the rules? I mean, that's really the Question. Well, human beings love telling people what to do. They do. They really do. And if they have a reason where they can justify that, that it seems feasible. Yeah. Like covid, then they just start imposing those rules. And if people are frightened, they're more likely to go along with those rules too. Imagine if instead of doing what they did, imagine if they spent a lot of time telling people how to strengthen their immune system.


Imagine if they distributed free vitamins. Imagine if they put money into keeping these hospitals well staffed, hired more people and maybe even possibly tried to talk about opening up alternative hospitals if there was some overflow. But allowed people to go to work, told people, look, wear your mask social distance, take care of your health. Take your vi, do all these things. But we can't fucking taint the economy for nine months and not expect disaster. Well, We actually have some good examples out there. And even though it ta it gets a lot of criticism. The way Sweden handled it is probably, again, more aligned with how America might have handled it in the previous decades.


Is that comparable though? Because Sweden is so small in comparison. I mean, you have Stockholm, you have, you have some cities, but you have all these like small villages and people are generally healthier there too. I think it's comparable in the sense that in general, people are the best judges for what's best for themselves. I mean, government can give advice. They made recommendations to people in Sweden. They just didn't coerce them. Yeah. They just didn't force them to have a curfew here. Or their, their kids went to school. And, and people in general, people can make good decisions for themselves and their families. They're the ones that should be making the decisions, not the government.


A hundred percent. I couldn't agree more. And that is the difference between the way Texas approached this and the way California did. That's what drove me outta California. Yeah. The high taxes are stupid, but I liked living there. It was, lot of my friends were there because Where is it more beautiful in the whole world than California? It's an amazing climate. It's, it's, it's just very, very incredibly beautiful place. I away From Fires too, though. I Well, that's true. I love to, I love to visit California, but I wouldn't wanna live there. The, the comedy community there is pretty awesome. It's the comedy store and the improv. I mean, it's just two of the best clubs in the world. And they're right in this one city. And the, the community of comedians is just fantastic.


And the fact that this Was la was it the Silicon Valley, so to speak of com of comedy Maybe better. Yeah, because Silicon Valley is, I mean, there's other parts of the world that have technology hubs, right? There's not really another comedy hub other than New York, Chicago. Not really. No. No. Chicago has Second City, which is a improv hub. It's different. You know, there's a, a great history of sketch comedy out of there. Of course. You know, second City is where, you know, Belushi came from and a lot of great sketch comedians came from. But as far as standup, it's really LA and New York. It used to be. Boston had a big part of it. And Boston still is a small community. Austin has right here.


Austin, Texas has a, a small community that's always been very good. Like Kennison and Hicks Hicks actually came out here. Have you done standup in Austin here? Yeah. Yeah, I have. Yeah. Yeah. I did Stubbs Barbecue, which last week. There you go. And then I did Vulcan Gas Company the week before. So yeah. I'm, I'm, I'm getting rolling again. Ultimately I'm gonna open up a club here. So you still love doing standup? It's The most fun. It's the most fun. John, I know I'm not interviewing you, but when you were like a kid, were you like, were you the class clown? No, that came later. Yeah. Yeah. You were a good boy. No, No, I wasn't a good boy at all. Most of my friends thought I was crazy. They didn't, they never thought I was gonna be a comedian.


Like if you talk to the people that I went to high school with, You told me earlier that that comedians as a, as a general rule, are kind of screwed up. Oh yeah. Yeah. A hundred percent. Yeah. As a general rule rule to want to do that, to want to humiliate yourself, get on stage. And the failure, the, the bombing is some of the most intense emotional pain a person can ever subject themselves to or be subjected. Is it, Is it worse than like, getting rejected by a girl that you're in love with? It's like sucking a thousand dicks in front of your mother. That's how I usually describe it. But he, it's different and worse because some guys would probably like doing that. There's, there's some people that would be like, watch mom, this is who I am.


And then they would, they would enjoy it. Get over it, mom. Yeah. Get over it. Mom. No one likes bombing. Somebody might like sucking a thousand dicks for other mom. No one likes bombing. It's just an awful feeling because you're demanding attention and you don't deserve it. And the audience is like, you don't deserve this atten and you know, you don't deserve it. So you have this like, deep self-hate, but you have to get through that to get good at it. It's an inevitable part of the whole process of doing standup. You, you kind of sync up with the audience. Can you kind of tell what's gonna land that night? You change your, your show, so to speak, as you pick up the feeling in the audience. Ah, you move around a little depending upon how you feel and how they feel.


But you know, you have an act and your act is, But you have a lot of different things. You, a lot of things you could do. Yes. Yeah. There's a lot of things you talk about. I mean, he like say, I don't think this joke's gonna land with this particular audience. No. You go through, you go through they, they need to hear this. It's, you know, it's, it gives you an opportunity to try to figure out a better way to word it or a better way to justify your position or a better, or a softer way to land it. You know, it's like there's all, like, there's a lot of different weird things that are going on when you're doing comedy. Comedy is kind of like mass hypnosis. That's what it's like. You know, I do a lot of public speaking, so I have learned that there's, you know, you have to sync up with the audience and I can, I can just tell whether this is gonna land well with this particular group or whether it's not.


And I, I sort of adjust on the fly. I still have a speech I'm gonna give, but I do alter it as I go along. I shorten some stuff, lengthen other stuff, and I substitute if I think that's gonna bomb out so well. I think public speaking, like what you're doing when you're standing up and, and talking about a very particular subject is almost more open-ended because you really never know what kind of crowd you're gonna get. Whether they're gonna be in a good mood or a bad mood, whether they're bored or hot or cold. When you go to see comedy, generally people go there because they want to have fun. Yeah. So they have a good perspective when they get there. They're like, I've come here to have fun, laugh. I hope these comedians are funny. Like, you go there with like a little bit of a smile on your face when you sit down, like, here we go.


It's gonna be fun. Yeah. And so they have a predisposition to wanna laugh anyway. Yes, yes. They're not going there to judge you. They're going there to laugh. And Some people are, but those people are, you Know, that they, they already didn't like you before they went there. Yeah. Or you know, there's some people that that think they're gonna, oh, well I'm gonna go and I'm gonna heckle, I'm gonna show 'em what's up. There's these, These kinda People. But, and generally clubs kick those people out. Really, most people that come to comedy clubs, they go because it's fun. Look, I still love comedy as a, a a as an audience member. I enjoy it as a customer. It's fun. I love watching great comedians. It's, it's feels good to laugh. I love, I love their creativity. Do you learn a lot from other comedians?


Yeah. You do. Yeah. You do. You learn what makes you laugh. You like sometimes I'll, I'll see someone performing and it'll give, it'll inspire me. I'm like, wow, that guy really put a lot into that. Or, or wow. Her writing is sore. It's so clever. And it'll make you, it, it'll fire up your neurons. It'll get you excited. Do You do your, all your own writing? Yes. Yeah, I do all my own Writing. Is that common or unusual or It's, Most, most comedians do that. Yeah. There's only a few comics that like occasionally. So Am I giving you any material right now, Joe? No, not yet. Okay. Not yet. Maybe it'll happen occasionally. Comedians will write taglines for each other. Like, Michelle Wolf gave me a great tagline after we did a show together the other night. She gave me a, a really nice tagline.


I was like, oh. Right, right. When she said I was like, was, that's nice secret. Can't tell you. I'll tell you later. I have to, I have to pay to go to the club. No, I'll Tell you. I just don't wanna say it online off. I Didn't know you censored yourself when you were doing the show. I'm Not censoring myself. John. Why are you making me uncomfortable? Making me sensitive? It's, it's Austin's a particularly good place to comedy cuz there's a great history of standup comedy in Texas. Like Kennison, who's arguably one of the greatest of all time. You know, this is where he cut his teeth. This is where it all went together for him. So Austin, like when I first started doing standup, I was selling out in Houston before I was selling out anywhere. Cuz for whatever reason, they had this longing for that kind of raw comedy that you really, it's hard to get in a lot of places that are maybe a little bit too politically correct.


Like, there's certain places where they're, they're so woke, they're almost like they wanna laugh, but they want to call you out on your comedy almost as much as they wanna laugh. And they don't want to get criticized for laughing on something that's they shouldn't laugh at. Right? Yeah, Yeah. We were talking about this before the show. They Should go into disguise. Yeah, right. Like a Groucho marks. Exactly. Exactly. Glasses and mustache. Exactly. Well, you can get some great disguises today, you know, like with the prosthetics and all the stuff that they can do today. Yeah. If you wanna go to a comedy show and just laugh at the most horrible Shit, maybe some of 'em are doing that. It's don't think they are, John. I don't think people think that far in advance. Maybe like a very, very small percentage of the population.


Have you been to a lot of standup comedy? I haven't, no. I confess just been working my ass off for I think it would be interesting for you just from the perspective of the fact that you do a lot of these public speaking gigs. You know, like I think you would, I think whenever you get the chance to see someone else perform in a different way, like, I like going to see musicians because I have zero talent. I have no musical talent at all, all, so when I go to see a musician, I can just enjoy it solely as an audience member. I don't have to remove myself from the, like, like as a fellow comic, I'll judge someone's delivery or timing, even though I'm trying to just enjoy it. You're, there's always gonna be a part of you that's like, ah, this is kind of clunky.


Like, why is he setting it up like this? But when you go to see music, I could just enjoy someone performing. I think I get something out of that. I'm gonna give it another try. I'll tell you, I'll tell you when I'm in town. Next, the, the, the back to the subject of capitalism. Capitalism and Marxism and socialism. This, right now we're in a wave of this. Right? It's become more popular now. I I would say over the last, particularly during the Trump administrations, the, the concept of socialism at least has become more, more publicly discussed than any time that I can remember in my life. Why do you think that is?


I think it's because the generation that's coming up is, I mean, you have to understand the academic community is is, I always say the intellectuals have always been the enemy of business, enemy of certainly the en enemy of capitalism. And But why is that? I think because in a, in a market society, which has been rare in history, we haven't mostly had market societies, but they're not very important in a market society. The intellectuals aren't very important. Generally not as important. No. But Aren't they the ones that inspire the minds of the people that create and, and maybe innovate in the industry? They Don't have the same social status that the entrepreneurs have an Elon Musk or, or Steve Jobs or Jeff Bezos.


So you think it's an ego issue? The social status issue. Think, think about it this way. If you, you're, you're going to school, okay? And the people that end up teaching in the universities were always the smartest kids in the school generally. And they, and they do well in school, I mean smart in terms of doing well in school. And they go on to college and then they, they they go and get a PhD and then they, they, that's all they've known is school friends and relationships. And they, and they make more money than the intellectuals do. And that seems like that's completely unfair. It's an unjust world that the less smart people are making more money than the smart people do and they have more status in the society. And I think, I think that's under underlying it is a resentment or an envy of a society that doesn't judge them to be as important as they judge themselves.


That's interesting. But I think it's a very flawed perspective. And, and first of all, the, the term smart is a weird term, right? I Said smart in terms of school. I didn't say in terms of street smarts Yeah. Or ability to do things to connect with people. There's emotional intelligence. I'm merely saying they're good at taking tests, writing papers, abstracting thoughts, essentially. Yeah. But this is what I'm saying that just the term smart, it's almost like the problem is, it's like a blanket term, right? It's like drugs, you know, it applies to a bunch of different things that don't necessarily seem to be related. But the people that are interested in that pursue that, the fact that they can't understand that there's an intel, like Elon Musk is a great example.


If you don't think Elon Musk is intelligent, you're either denial, you're in, You're not very intelligent yourself. Yeah. You don't think Elon Musk is intelligent. You're Delusional or you're a liar or you're in denial. Right? It's, it's one of those things, something wrong with the way you think. He's clearly intelligent, but there's people that call him a fool and that they're like the guy's running like four different businesses simultaneously. They're all successful and he's innovating with, when it comes to space travel in a way that you would assume that someone have to dedicate most of their life just singularly to that task. To be able to figure out past NASA how to shoot a rocket up into space and have it land right. And then reuse it. No one's been able to do that besides him or up until he did it.


And I, I think Jeff Bezos's company's doing the same thing. Yeah. Too now Blue Origin. Yeah. They're, they're obviously two of the great entrepreneurs of Yeah. This particular era. But I don't think Jeff Bezos is actually engineering these things. But if you think about it, the, the intellectuals have always disliked business. They've always discriminated against the merchant classes, the Jews in the West Chinese and the east. There's really been no historical period where intellectuals praised business. Maybe a little bit around the time of Adam Smith up until probably Ricardo and Mathis wrote in the early 19th century. For the most part, business people have been seen. They're disruptive, they change things. They upset the status quo.


They're they in, they innovate well. A lot of people don't like innovations. It's threatening. It changes, it changes social status, it changes wealth, relationships. That, it's almost like capitalism is like a genie that got out of the bottle and they're trying very hard to stuff the genie back in the bottle as much as they can. And I think if you think about it that way, you'll understand we're never gonna win the intellectuals over. I mean, I speak in universities all the time and the students, I'm an entrepreneur. I self-identify that way. Students love when I talk about conscious capitalism. Cause I say you can do good and you can do well. There's no contradiction here. You're not, you're the good guys here. You're not the bad guys.


Do you debate People about this? I do. I I've debated a number of socialists And what, what, what is their primary argument? Their primary argument is, is that business is greedy and selfish. And it's about motivations that, that they, that business people have the wrong motivations in a lot of ways. Conscious capitalism is an answer to that. It's a complete answer to that because in the book and in conscious leadership as well, we're basically arguing that business isn't primarily about maximizing profits. Business is primarily about creating value for other people. And through creating value for other people, you do make a profit, but it's the value creation that comes first. The profits come second in exchange.


Right? And it's almost, if you are creating value, then you are profitable and then you can reinvest those profits and you, and you have this upwards spiral. So that's, that business has this potential for higher purpose. It's not primarily about greed. Greed is found in human nature, Joe. It's not just found in business people. There are plenty of greedy governmental officials, plenty of greedy politicians, greedy lawyers. Greed is endemic to the human nature. Business people either have no more or no less than it. It's just part of who we are. Has anyone ever laid it out in a way that's very compelling? Like when you have these debates with socialists and someone, has anyone ever laid it out in a way where they have a point where you see their point?


You always, the best way to do a debate is completely understand the other side's position. Yeah. Understand it as good or better than they understand it. And so I've read widely in socialistic literature. I think I do understand it. It's, it's, it's a type of utopianism. It's a, it's an attempt to change human nature. If we would all be, if we would all love each other, and if we'd all share equally, then the world would be a better place. And hey, guess what? It probably would be if, if we were naturally that way. But we're not naturally that way. We, we look first generally for ourselves and our own families and then our, and our growing circle of relationships that we develop, we want, we don't, it's not natural to, it's natural to want your own children to have advantages.


That's, that's just human nature to want your children to flourish because you, you raise them, you love them. And somehow or another to say that's unfair is cutting against human nature. People are always gonna look for, for advantages or privileges, so to speak for their children. Yeah. People don't like when people have advantages and have and, and have victories because then someone has to lose. And when someone loses, they equate that someone losing Against human nature. People are always gonna look for, for advantages or privileges, so to speak, for their children. Yeah. People don't like when people have advantages and have and, and have victories because then someone has to lose. And when someone loses, they equate that someone losing with a bad feeling with the that person being victimized.


Like there's some, So here's a big idea. We talk about unconscious leadership. We have a chapter called find win, win win solutions. The metaphors that we use to think about society tend to be very binary, good versus evil, light versus darkness win versus lose. And so they tend to think of business as a win lose game. Somebody wins and somebody else is losing. But the beauty of capitalism is it's a win-win win game. It's an infinite game. It's a game because the customers are winning or they wouldn't trade. The employees are winning. How are the customers winning? They're getting products and services at a, at a and and, and there's competition to make those services and products better.


The employees are winning because they have jobs and opportunities to grow. Benefits are paid and they do that voluntarily. They're not forced to work for any particular company. They do it because they think it's in their best interest win for the employees. The suppliers who are trading with the business, they're winning as well. Or they wouldn't make the exchanges, investors are winning or they wouldn't make the investments. And the larger society is winning because business is the engine that creates all the money that goes into nonprofits and governments. Without business, there is no government and there is no, and there is no nonprofit sector because those are ultimately supplied through what business creates. So business is a win, win, win game.


All of these stakeholders are winning. And that's why capitalism lifts society up. Socialism is an attempt to reverse that back to a win-lose game. And that's why it always fails. And that's why capitalism win. How's an win? How an attempt to bring it back to a win-lose game. In what way? It It, the ones that are winning, so to speak, the business people are clamped down. So they're not allowed to win. It's like, we're gonna take your success and we're gonna redistribute it. So that, as again, you said earlier on incentives matter, but we're, we're gonna take away the incentives for business to really flourish and succeed. They should do it from altruistic reasons. And we may do some things for altruistic reasons, but you cannot build a society around it.


Do, when you're talking about win, win, win, this is a very, in many ways it's, I see what you're saying, but there are things that are negative that are associated with profit and innovation and particularly expanding industry. Right? Particularly environmental impacts. Like when you talk, when you say win, win, win, like there's, there's very rarely when you're, especially when you're dealing with creating and designing and building things, you've got a negative impact in some way. Environmentally. Two, two points. First of all, historically socialism's been far worse, worse polluter than than capitalism Countries.


How so? Well, if you just look at the environmental destruction that the Soviet Union left behind it, it was a complete disaster. Right? But that's this, this is socialism done wrong, John. We're gonna do it right here. Who Has done it right Joe? No way. No one's done it. Right. But the Soviet Union is a bad example. Stalin was, yeah, But all of eastern Europe were there. There's no incentive to protect the common good in socialism. And they don't, when the government has a monopoly of all decision and power making, they don't tend to look out for the environment. That's one of the myths. You also take away agency from people and you take away their desire to improve and do better. And without incentive, people just don't perform the same way.


But the beautiful thing about business, let's concede a partial truth to what you said, that there will be unintended negative consequences, as you say environmentally. Well that's why you have to regulate business to a certain extent. That's why you have to make people responsible for their environmental pollutants. And because Bennett business innovates and has an incentive to innovate, business can innovate and create solutions to those environmental Problems. Okay, lemme stop you there for a second. When you say make people responsible for their environmental pollutants, then we're, we're gonna have to deal with another aspect of capitalism. And that's the, the effect that special interest groups and lobbyists have on politicians because they create laws that shield these big businesses from consequences, from these negative actions.


So by saying that they have to clean up their problem, the only way that's ever going to happen is if they're not protected, if they don't use that influence and money. Totally Agree. So this is where I think a lot of people have a, a valid argument against capitalism. Exactly. Capitalism is kind of fucked over our, our, our, our system of government in a way. Because money has gotten so deeply involved with super pacs and lobbyists and there's so much money involved that it changes the way we, we govern things. Is that a flaw of capitalism or is that a flaw of government? I think it's a flaw of government. But that government has been influenced by capitalism, by capitalism's desire for universal growth, for constant growth.


The the sad truth is that humanity is not perfectable. We can never create the perfect system and the attempt to create the perfect system, the perfect enemy, the good right. Capitalism is not perfect. It does not. Because human choices and what people want varies people to capitalism will sell cigarettes to people because that's what people want. It gives 'em pleasure, but it's bad for their health. But they're, they're, they're giving people what they want. It's, it's the same thing in, in any type of externality that's not, that's not deliberately done to harm the society. It's sort of a byproduct. Right. But this is why win, win win doesn't really work.


It's not really win, win win, it's win most of the time, but with some negative consequences that are better than the alternative. Right. But what you strive for is to, is to take those externalities or those negative consequences and try to through good government to, to minimize them or less than, I'll give you an example. So you used to live in la Well when I went to LA back in the early eighties, it was like going to New Delhi today, I couldn't see my lungs hurt less than 24 hours. Right. But through good regulations, the error in LA is a fraction, as polluted as it was 40 years ago, we have been able to clean it up. That is an example of how you can take the worst impacts of industrialization and, and ameliorate them or lessen them.


What Do you think about the government of LA's decision or the governor, governor of California rather's decision to eliminate all sales of combustion engine cars after 2035? It's easy to, my first thought is, is that a lot of times people make these proclamations in the future that they'll never be around to see the ultimate that actually realized, meaning that it'll be somebody else's problem then. So it's a politician will make promises and claims for the future that they won't themselves ever deliver on. Yeah. So I I think that's well intentioned in terms of lessening environmental externalities from the internal combustion engine or from carbon production.


However, is it realistic? Is it possible? I don't think so. Well there's also people that argue that it's not even well intentioned. If you look at the actual impact of dragging minerals out of the ground to make these batteries that the production of electric cars, it's, it's not a zero impact on the environment at all. It's like there's profound impacts. Yeah. There, there is, there's no escape. You know, humanity, ever since humanity's been around Joe, it's had a negative impact on the environment, right? If, if the hunters and gatherers wiped out most of the large animal species that they could, that were wild, they did it everywhere they went, they did it in Europe, they did it in North America, they did it in Australia.


Agriculture is when you take under a lot of land under cultivation, you're gonna, you're gonna mow down the jungles. And if you're gonna graze cattle, that's gonna have a negative impact on the environment. There's no escaping human humanities impact on the environment. It's always gonna be there. Because guess what? We're part of the environment. The question is how do we, you can create the win-win win. You just can't create perfection. We're always, we solve some problems. And when new problems come up, every generation has to begin to solve the problems of the, the problems that the parents couldn't solve. I agree with you that capitalism is a better alternative. And I agree because of all the things that we talked about, that it gives more incentive that the, that having innovation and having these incentives creates better alternatives for people in terms of like how to live their life.


It gives them in, in terms of medicine and in terms of what, what's going on in the medical industry, saving far more lives, fixing far more people that have been injured. And I, I agree with all those things. I just think that sometimes we tend to want to put things in these very simplistic packages like win, win, win. And I don't necessarily think that's a, a Win win win is, it's an ethical framework that you can use to think about situations like you and I've met today. So we can create win-wins between each other. You know, reciprocity, I, you in fact we're probably doing that right now.


I have a new book that I love people to read And you gave me some vegan cheese And you, you're not paying me anything to come on your show. And I usually get a lot of money, don't I don't, I speak. So it's a win-win. We're both gaining or we wouldn't be doing this change. Who Pays you to speak? Like what generally is it these business conferences people wanna learn about? Mostly Business conferences. So people wanna learn trade, how you trade, did It trade shows? Trade shows mostly. One guy told me one time, he said he was really honest, he said this was a few years ago and he said there were like three pretty well-known business speakers, including myself. And, and I said, how did you get all three of us? And he said, you are all three.


We're a lot cheaper than Hillary. And the point is, and cleaner. And he told me, he said, look, it's simple. We have a trade show, they're mostly gonna be on the floor. This is the one time I can get everybody in around the industry because they'll come in to hear you speak or they hear the other speakers. So we're paying you to put PE to put butts in the seats so we can hold our trade show together. So that's a win-win. It's good for me. They're paying me money. It's good for them. We're getting butts in the seat to listen to their, to their trade show spiel. And also you want to give people, I wanna get my message out there. Yeah. I wanna get my message out there about conscious capitalism.


This message, is this something that you have sort of developed over the years of arguing with people about it? No, it's mostly from what we did at Whole Foods. Cuz I had no background in business. Right. I'm, I'm an entrepreneur. I didn't, I You guys started here, right? In Austin. That's right. First store here. 40 over 42 years ago now. Jesus, You look great. How old are you? 67. You look Very good. Well thank you. I'll Tell you right now. See, look, win, win, win, win-win, relationship, eating All that Whole Foods, foods. I'm eating all that Healthy Whole Foods. That is one thing that you guys did do that's very interesting, right? You created a market where like if you tell people I go to Whole Foods, you know, people are like, oh well you care about your health.


Like it's synonymous with healthy foods. Even in the name Whole Foods. That was our brand when we were up and comer and then when we got really rich, America loves the up and comer. But then once you have become really successful and you're making a lot of money, they start to turn on you. Oh no. Well we became whole paycheck. Who wrote, who said that? I don't know, but whoever did I wish they, I never saw it. I never saw that until right now. You just shit on yourself in a way that I never, all I heard was Whole Foods. I never heard Whole Paycheck. Then you, you, your team didn't do good research. Ah, I have no team. So is this when you sold to Amazon? No, no. The whole paycheck thing has been around for a long time.


Oh cuz whole paycheck. Meaning cuz it's so expensive. Yes. Because initially when we were up and comer you, if you shop at Whole Foods, you were showing everybody. You were sort of, you were with It predominantly Conscious. Yes. And you were hip and cool and then the narrative went sour because it's like you're a fool for shopping there because you can get the same food cheaper elsewhere. So you're going to whole paycheck. So the narrative turned negative, so to speak. I still see that pretty much all the time. Although since our merger with Amazon, we've cut our prices many, many times. How'd you do that? Amazon allowed Whole Foods to think long term. Again, we needed to cut our prices. But when you're a public company, if you're selling something for a dollar and you say, you know what, we need to sell this for 90 cents and you start selling it for 90 cents in the short run, you just cut your sales 10% cuz you're not selling any more of it over the long term.


People will realize, man, I can get a good deal for 90 cents. I used to pay a buck for it. And they start to shop with you more and, and your sales will go up. But when you're a public company and the market's very short-term oriented, you pay a heavy price in the short term for reducing your prices. And Amazon is willing to think long-term and let Whole Foods do that. Does Jeff Bezos got that long money son? He has long money because he's had, he's had a lot of brilliant ideas and put together a pretty, pretty good team. Yeah. What keeps that guy working? When you, when you have 150 in the bank, 150 billion, what keeps you going? Well, most of it. He has it in, doesn't have it in the bank. He's got it in stock. Probably got A few in The bank. He's got a few in the bank probably.


I feel like he could probably relax. I mean, I think I, I think the same thing that keeps me going at age 67. I mean, building something's great fun building Whole Foods. I don't, I mean, I've got plenty of money, Joe. I don't need to work. I just like it. It's Fun. Do you still run Whole Foods? Like what's your relationship there? Still Ceo. Still ceo. So you still work long hours? I don't work as long today as I did when I was in my twenties and thirties. There's no question about it. Cause I was putting a lot of 80 hour weeks in year after year after year after year. Well you're building some, you know, it wasn't work. It was play. Yeah, I was having a blast. It was fun. Elon Musk has famously said that if you're in a tech startup and you're not working 120 hour weeks, you won't succeed.


Yeah. I've never been into tech startup, so I can't speak for that. The grocery business wasn't quite that hard. But we did put a lot of 80 hour Weeks. That seems like not a lot of time to sleep. And I'm a great believer in sleep. Sleep is how you, Like how many hours are left? How many hours are in a week? Well, let's see. There's 24 hours, 168 hours a week. Hundred 68 hours. He's only Got 48 hours of sleep. That is ridiculous. Elon. How dare. Well, I don't know if all you did was that's 48 hours divided by seven, that's almost seven hours a night. If all you did was work and sleep, I don't know when he eats. Maybe you have to eat when you're working. You Definitely have to eat. I would've, I would recommend eating. And you gotta go to the bathroom sometime. Yeah, I gotta scratch that out.


So you sleep seven hours a night and just stay at work? Yeah. I I don't actually think you have to put a lot of energy in to build anything. Yes. But if you're doing it right, we talk a lot about conscious capitalism is about higher purpose. If you have a purpose that's animating you, it doesn't feel like work. It feels like play. It also attracts people to you that share that same purpose. This is something that I find very frustrating in people that don't recognize that it is incredibly difficult to build a successful business when they just want to tax the shit outta people and take all that money. Like, do you think it's easy to make something like Whole Foods? Do you think it's easy to make a company like Tesla? Do you think it's it's not easy.


It's an insanely difficult task. That's why most people don't do it. Exactly. But when someone does do it and they have become successful, then other people start looking at it and go, well, they have all this money. They should contribute more. Or they should do this. Or, you know, you're talking about some people have suggested some extraordinary tax rates in order to get us out of this current recession. And then I talk to business people and they say, that is the exact wrong approach because that's actually gonna stifle business. And business is the only thing that's gonna bring us out of this. If you incentivize businesses to take risks and to be open and to make more profits, then more people are gonna get jobs, then the economy bounces back.


But if you give them a gigantic tax burden, they're gonna be less likely to take chances. They're not going to be able to survive. And, and people on the outside who've never built a business like Whole Foods, they don't seem to see that. They don't see it. The reality is, is that people like an Elon Musk or Jeff Bezos, they are, they're good capital allocators, so to speak. They're not gonna waste that money. That money's gonna be reinvested to create new and more dynamic businesses that will help the innovations will help our society move forward.


When you just redistribute that money, it, there's no more additional innovation. It's just, it's just, it's being consumed. This whole idea that it's consumption that drives the economy is fundamentally a myth. It's mostly creativity and innovation that drives the economy. So we need to keep that money in the hands of our most creative people, which are entrepreneurs, creative business people. And for some reason I probably, I think because of envy, it seems so unfair. Again, we are in a win-lose model. If Jeff Bezos has $150 billion, then that's unfair in some sort of cosmic way. That's unfair. And they believe that some or another others have less.


So there's like this fixed pie and Jeff took a big piece of it. Or, or, or Elon Musk has taken a big piece of it, but it's not a fixed pie. That's the wrong metaphor. Innovationism is continually growing the pie. And in fact, humanity is demonstrably better off because of the capitalists because of the innovationists, let Me play devil's advocate. Cause this is the way they look at, at it. They would say, well, when you get to that sort of a position like a Jeff Bezos where you have 150 billion, you can exert your influence on people in a way that's detrimental to society. You've achieved too high of a position, you have too much power and you will probably lose, use that power to loosen regulations, to bribe politicians or influence politicians and to get laws passed that are better for your business and stifle competition.


I think that's a powerful argument. And if and when it happens, you have to push back against, you have to resist it. I think most business people are not doing that. I think, I don't see that Jeff's trying to pass or you know, or I don't see Mo, I don't see Jeff trying to pass laws that I don't, I'm not saying he is. If he was boy, would they come after him? Yeah. Because he's bawling so hard. They'd be like that motherfucker. He is. Doesn't have enough. But I know that before, when Whole Foods was, we were a public company for 25 years and we, we had the government go after us a few times for, well they tried to stop our, we tried to make an acquisition of a, of a company called Wild Oats back in 2007. We actually made the acquisition, but the FTC tried to stop it.


We ended up going into court with them and we actually won in court. And very interesting. The FTC has their own court and they, after we won in the federal courts, they said, well now we want to take you into the, our court, the administrative Court. Oh, terrific. They have their own court. They Have their own court. Don't You wish you had your own court? Take you to Whole Foods court motherfucker. I'll take the Ft. FTC to the whole court. Right. But you know, at the People's Court, You don't win in the FTC court. You don't win in that court. So, Well, how many people have won in that court? I think when I've looked at it at that time, this back in 2007, I think 46 of the 48 previous cases, this is from memory. So I could be wrong, had lost, They should go to court. So someone should take them to Court. But here's the thing, I asked our attorney, so okay, we're gonna lose in this court, in their court.


Then what happens? He says, well, then you appeal that back to the federal courts. And, and then after that, if they want to, they would go to the Supreme Court if they'll take it. I said, how much is it gonna cost me to just fight them in their own courts? They said, it's gonna cost you 30 million in legal fees. Not to mention a lot of executive time. It's like, oh man, 30 million. And we're gonna know we're gonna lose and then we're gonna have to spend another 30 million to go to the appeals and beyond that, the lawyers love it, by the way. Of course. They want you to do it Like divorce lawyers. Yes, exactly. Let's, they love it. Let's have people fight. You Guys should not talk. Don't Talk this Out. Don't try to work this out. Cause he's gonna try to, don't steal your money. He's gonna try to steal that money from you. He's a piece of shit. Look at him. Look at him.


So again, So what did you do? You wound up settling? We ended up, yes. We ended up, they let the merger go through and we agreed to sell off a bunch of stores. Oh. And that was, that was the best we could do. How many stores do you have to sell off? We, we put up about 30 for sale. I, and, and we, we only about, about, I don't know, I think five or six we sold off five or six. When someone is involved in that kind of a fucked up scenario where you bring 'em to FTC court where no one wins. If you do win like ultimately a Supreme Court, they, they should take it out of the salary of the people that forced you into doing that.


It should be worth it for you to go to war. Those rich guys should make the government do that with all their power. Yeah. You know, if the rich guys are so powerful, how come we have such high tax rates? Cuz you make a lot of money, but don't you shield it? Didn't Donald Trump pay like 700 bucks in taxes? I don't know what he paid in taxes cuz we never actually saw his, we just heard what the right New York Times said he paid. But we don't really know for sure cause we never really saw the taxes release. Well, the New York Times would never lie, But of course not. Isn't that funny? That, that's a funny thing to say now. Boy, that used to be like, if you said that in 1980, people would agree with you. Depends on how you say it too today. Yeah. Well there's a lot of dummies that think that New York Times never lie today, but they've been caught lying.


Unfortunately. Yeah, there's, there's a problem with journalism in particular today and it's that it's not just journalism now. It's a business that is sort of in a very fucked up place where sensationalism is very important to the business model. Yeah. The the, the click, the click through is the click bait. It's very important. It's very important. Nobody's buying physical copies anymore, so they can't just rely on subscriptions. Yeah. Did you, did you see that in recent documentary, the Social Dilemma? Yes, I did. That was kind of creepy. I had Tristan Harris on the podcast a couple weeks ago. Yeah, really? Yeah, Yeah, Yeah. It's very disturbing. Yeah. Because you see how this all plays out and you're, you know, you're seeing it right now online with the election results.


We are, yeah. You're Civil War looks like we're heading to our civil war. Yeah. And the, and then you have like, the real wacky sections of both, you know, you have the QAN on one side and the Antifa is on the other side and like, oh, it's so nuts. Like It is crazy, crazy, crazy crazy. That's Sydnee Powell lady. She seems unhinged. We'll see what she can deliver the goods or not. I'm Very curious to see how this all plans out or, or pans out rather, but it just, you know, it just seems like the most divided I can ever remember this country being Definitely in my lifetime, the most divided, which Is exactly what they were talking about in the social dilemma.


And they're, they were literally saying that what's happening with these algorithms, what's happening with these echo chambers that people are involved with in social media? What's happening with the way it, the way it influences the mind to gravitate towards these things that upset people and to rile people up and get people more and more interested in these particularly polarizing subjects like we're headed towards almost like a civil war. Yeah. You know, of course I do. Well I think the social dilemma is a good movie and a lot to learn from. And I do think it, it overstates it. And I, in our, in our book Conscious Leadership, we talk about cultural intelligence in the book, particularly the very last part of the appendix.


And we talk about how there're there are three major types of worldviews that exist in the United States that are, that are clashing each other. The first one is more of a traditional worldview of heritage values that, that might be traditional Christianity or traditional Judaism combined with belief in the Declaration of Independence, the constitution, sort of very traditional values. And, and, and then you have the modernist worldview, which is science, rationality, capitalism, success, getting ahead.


And that's the second. And now we have a progressive worldview that hasn't been around that long, but it's, it's a third major worldview. And I think statistically we think about 30% of the population is in the traditional worldview. About 50% is in the modernist worldview and about 20% is in the progressive worldview. And these, all these worldviews are struggling with each other to dominate, to have their values become the law of the land. And everybody must conform with their values because their values are correct. So that, that's, that we think that's the essence of this cultural struggle going on. And we, we need, and we argue in the book that there's a fourth we call post progressivism, which basically recognizes all the values have good things about them and they have some bad things about them.


Right. So they have dignities and disasters. And if we're gonna, if we're gonna get through it, we need conscious leaders who will be able to take the, the, the best things about each one of these worldviews and integrate them together so that we can give each of the worldviews enough to feel like this is a society worth belonging to. If we try to cram one set of values down everybody else's throats and force that into law, we're gonna have a civil war cuz America's not gonna stand for it. Yeah, I like that perspective that there are good things and bad things about these sides. And that's one of the, the things we're talking about like that we're so polarized today. And something you were talking about with capitalism because you were saying, Hey John, it's not perfect.


The, and capitalism is a modernistic sort of part of the modernistic worldview, and it's not perfect. There are some problems and challenges with it, but the dignities of it are tremendous and they, we can't throw out the baby with the bathwater just because it's not perfect, because there is no perfect solution to any of these problems. We're gonna muddle our way through like we always do, Is now when you look at the positive aspects of all these different schools of thought, and you look at progressivism, which is the one that is probably the most on the rise today, right? Why is it the most on the rise? Like what do you think when you say you look at Both sides, you might say that you can see each of these worldviews comes out of the previous worldview.


So if you go back 200 years ago, 250 years ago, the modernist worldview was just being born. The, the founding fathers of our country were early modernists people like Franklin and Jefferson and Madison and Hamilton. These were early modernists, but almost everybody else was a traditionalist. And, but we created the foundation to create really the world's first modern society, which was the United States. Now progressivism in a way is a reaction to the disasters of modernism. Like the modernism does have environ negative environmental impacts. And so part of is we have to solve those problems. And so progressivism is partly a solving that problem.


Things like racism and sexism and homophobia or whatever. These are also aspects that Progressive is reacting to, to say that this is not fair. This is not just, so the, the really beautiful thing about progressivism is that it's striving to give dignity to all these different sort of marginalized people that were always, you know, used to get beat up when they were young, so to speak, in a, in a, in a more modernistic traditional society. The problem is, is that when you begin to force your values on everybody else, then, then we begin to get a lot of blow back on that.


And that's true for progressivism as well. It needs to harmonize with traditionalism and modernism and not treat those as the enemies that must be conquered. The things that progressivism what the things that resonate with a lot of people is the uplifting of the impoverished, right? The, the education in poor communities where the, traditionally the education has been substandard. All all these different things that I think for whatever reason our government or our society has, we've aired there's a problem in not, not, not dealing with those, those issues.


So I would, I would take a little different interpretation actually. Modernism is dealing with it. Modernism has been lifting humanity up as I argued earlier in those. Okay. But it's not, it's not, but It's not Done a great job Evidence. It's, it's actually done a very good job, but it hasn't, it hasn't finished the job. So progressivism is correct to recognize that there's some people being left out that the, the rising tide is not lifted all the boats. What about those that are being left behind? What about them? They're absolutely right. We need to take care of them. We need to find solutions to their problems. But it's not by throwing modernism out, right? It's not, it's by taking modernism and then and then adding on a greater sensitivity for those who are downtrodden, who are, who are, who have bad educational systems.


This is where you can take some of the good aspects Exactly. Of progressive. Exactly, Exactly. These are the aspects that I identify with As do I. Yeah. So the ideas of progressivism when it comes to dealing with impoverished communities, dealing with crime ridden communities and coming up with strategies to help the people that are stuck in those spots. Right? Exactly. Yeah. That if you take away that once, once that gets, starts getting implemented on a wide scale, then a lot of the arguments against capitalism are start to fade. Hints. Conscious capitalism. Is that In your book right Here? Yes, exactly. That's capital. Exactly what it's about Right here By John Mackey and Rod available, Available on Amazon And at Whole Foods.


Well you can get it at Whole Foods, Probably Barnes and Noble Food, I'm sure. Dealing with this debate and dealing with this argument. Has anyone or have just having these conversations over long periods of time, like I know you have, has this shaped your perspective in any way, like having to formulate these very clear arguments? Of course. Yeah. I mean, you can't really think clearly, at least I think dialectically Joe, I need pushback. I need a devil's advocate because I'm always around, bro. Okay, Well you're apparently you're not always around. You're travel a lot.


I haven't been traveling that much, but, But, but you need A real devil's advocate, not Knuckle. Well, your ideas need to stand the test of, of being Yes. Struggled with, Right. That's a real problem with people that don't want to hear the other perspective We're stuck in. That's your social dilemma issue. Yes. When we get stuck in an echo chamber, if we only, if you're, if you're a traditionalist and you only watch Fox News for example, then you're not gonna get a wider perspective. But if you're progressive and you only read the New York Times and watch CNN and msnbc, you may not be getting a, a wider perspective either. We need to expose ourselves to the wider context of information that's out there. That is a philosophy that I think should be taught in school that is as important as mathematics and history.


There's a, there's a thing about challenging ideas and looking at your own ideas in a way, in an objective way. I, I think one of the things that I've worked very hard at doing is not being married to any of the ideas that I have in my head and that I don't, they're not mine. They're an idea. And even though I've spouse these ideas, even though I've defended these ideas, if something comes along that shows me that this idea is flawed or inaccurate, I have made a very pos a very conscious, positive effort to abandon those ideas. So do I or reexamine them. I've got a metaphor for it that you, you I'm happy to loan it to.


Okay. You can have it too. It's like ideas are like, I've got clothes on here today, but they're not who I am. I'm just wearing them today. Right. And, and I'll put these aside and I'll wear different clothes tomorrow. They're, the clothes are not me and the ideas and beliefs I have are not me either. Right. When, when they don't fit any longer, I set them aside and I get new clothes that fit better. That, and, and it's, that's a, that's a very liberating way to think about your beliefs and your ideas because otherwise, if you identify yourself with what you believe that means if somebody criticizes one of your beliefs, many people take it as a personal attack that somehow they're, they're saying, I don't have worth because they disagree with my views. No, they're just saying they don't like the clothes that you're wearing.


Yeah. But that's not who you are. So I'm not my beliefs, they are just what I'm wearing for right now. That's an interesting way of looking at it. And I think there is a real problem with people looking at people's ideas and judging them and their value as a human being based on those ideas. But we do it because most people are married to, to their ideas and we're taught to defend our ideas to the death. That these ideas are core to who you are as a person, that they're core to how you identify how you think of yourself. It's like the matrix. You gotta free your mind. Yeah. Free Your mind. Well, there's, it's very freeing in, in being able to recognize you're wrong and say you're wrong.


It's very, it's very freeing. It is. And we resist it, but when you resist it and you know you're wrong, you feel like a loser like inside your head, you know, you're full of shit. You know, I don't, I don't experience it that way. So one of the things I try to do as CEO Whole Foods market is I always try to admit my mistakes in a very public way because I feel like that helps everybody else admit their own mistakes. Yeah. And I'll just say, you know, I was wrong about that. I made a mistake, I'm sorry about that. And because then if you admit you made a mistake, you can learn from it. You don't have to make the same mistake again. And it also gives everybody permission. If, hey, if John is gonna admit his mistakes, then I can admit my mistakes too. And you have a much more open dialogue with people.


Nobody's seen as infallible as all knowing is never right. Always right, never wrong. Yeah. That's a great philosophy. It's very important. I mean, nobody wants a, a dictator that they have to walk on eggshells around and, you know, they have to pretend that this person is only making good decisions. When you think that, I mean, that's the argument against Donald Trump, right? I mean, never says he's wrong, never admits he's wrong, doesn't show any empathy. I'm not Gonna defend Trump. How dare you? I will merely say that which presidents in our lifetime ever admit they made any mistakes. I just, that's just not something I see politicians do very often. Well, governor Newsom made the mistake when he went to that restaurant and he admitted it when he got busted. Well, only when he got busted and he couldn't, he couldn't deny your own eye.


Who gonna believe what he, what I say are your own eyes? So, well Then he lied though. Yeah. He said he was outside. Right. He didn't anticipate photos coming out after he gave that And he didn't know how many people were gonna be there. Yeah. And he says, I should have just turned around right then and there. So Bitch, you knew who I was gonna be there. Yeah. But who knows, who Knows his buddy. I guess when you're caught red-handed, it's hard to continue to, well, Look, I'm not the governor, but if someone says we're having a Party Rogan for governor, I think that's a great idea. I Like our governor. I like Governor Abbot. It's Good. I like, I like Governor Evans too. When you go to a party, if someone says, we're gonna have a party over my house during times of Covid, I'd be like, how many people are gonna be there?


That'd be like one of the first questions I ask. Like, I don't, I don't wanna go to a party where there's 500 people and I don't know anybody. Of course not breathing everybody's funky air. I would ask that. And I'm not even the governor, I'm not even telling people you have to close their businesses. And I would ask that, forget about looking hypocritical just for my own health. You know, the, the Newsom example though is a, is a kind of a personal example. You know, we always are quick to point out hypocrisy in people. Sure. But I'm saying that very seldom do you ever see a, a a, a politician or a president or a senator or governor admit they made a policy mistake. Right. So you don't see Governor Cuomo in New York saying that, gosh, I should never sent those people to the nursing homes.


No, it really made a mistake on that. Good Point. We don't see the obvious mistakes ever admitted. Don't You think that in that situation there would be a legal problem? Because if he did admit that that's a mistake publicly, they would probably sue this shit outta him. And you're talking about they could Still sue him whether he admitted or not, because, But they would have the evidence, they would have his own, his own testimony publicly that he made a mistake. You would not be able to argue against that look clear. I think we both agree. Good point. Clearly he made a mistake. That's a giant mistake and it's responsible for thousands of deaths. Yeah. I mean, it's gonna hard, it's hard to argue that you take people that are covid positive, you send 'em to a nursing home where folks are older and their immune systems are compromised and a lot of them die.


I mean, I don't know what number died, but I know that there have been reports in places where there have been covid deaths where an enormous percentage of them were in nursing homes, like more than 20%. Oh no, no, Joe, I think it's over 50%. The United States are close to it and I I mean 95% have comorbidities. Right. So, and And you imagine being in that situation where you're an older person and you're just like trying to ride out your last days. Yeah. And the governor sends sick people back to the nursing home and you realize that Mary down the hall is coughing up a fucking storm now. Yeah. I mean, I, we're way out of where I'm kind of a little bit outta my comfort zone.


That's What I like to Do to people I know, but we don't know what really, what what the governor might have been thinking. I'm I I believe his intentions were probably good. He was very worried they were gonna be, oh, they were gonna have too many cases. They weren't gonna have enough hospital beds for it. Yeah, no, I'm sure it, It's probably a mistake. But it was, it was, it was made with good intentions. And I don't think it was made with bad intentions to hurt people. I don't think so either. I don't think he did it to try to kill old people. Exactly. That's what point, I think he just, just made an error. He Was actually trying to save lives. He just made a mistake. And it's also, and people make mistakes When you're in a situation like that where there's not much you can do when you are stuck. You know, I was talking to a nurse and she was explaining to me, and she's a nurse in a covid ward, and she was explaining to me the decisions that they have to make.


She's like, during like the peak when, when it was, you know, all the beds were full, she's like, we really were in situations where we're like, we have to send this person home and they're going to die and there's no room for, for new people to come in. So we literally have to send, we have to take people that are terminal Triage. Yeah. There's not much you could do. And I go, well, what it, how do you protect their family from getting it? She's like, you can't. I'm like, oh my God. So you're, you're sending people who are dying of Covid home and they were likely going to infect their family. You know, you tell their family, take all the precautions they can, but if you have to do it, you have to do it.


That's when you're in a situation where there's no good answers, That's not a win-win. Right. Yeah. That's not a win-win win either. Nope. Yeah. It's, it's hugely unfortunate, but it's also unprecedented, right? Like when Mario Cuomo became governor, or Andrew Cuomo rather became governor, he didn't think that this was something that he was gonna have to encounter. He probably had strategies in play for economic growth, for, you know, dealing with law enforcement, all these different problems that a governor would face, taxes, all these different things. He probably never thought, oh, there might be a thing that kills all these old people if I send them back to nursing homes. I'm sure there was not a plan for it.


No. Well, that's one thing about this. That's Why I never want to be Governor Joe. Please don't. Everybody will hate you. Think they hate you when you became successful with whole paycheck is Wait, wait till, you know, Wait till I'm governor. Yeah. Oh my God. Well, and then if you become president, it's even worse then. No. Literally half the country hates you. Oh, Look how many people are trying to kill you. Yeah. I don't, as far as I know, I don't have anybody trying to kill me. Congratulations. At this time. Probably like one butcher. It's thinking this motherfucker. No, just kidding. You're, you're, you're time, time doing this. Your time spent, like as a, a leader, as a, you know, do, do you understand better the, the pitfalls of these leaders because of the fact that you Yeah, sure.


You've been a leader of a corporation. Absolutely. Absolutely. You just have a lot of responsibility and if you're a leader, you're also being paid to make good decisions. And if you make good decisions, a lot of people benefit. And if you make bad decisions, a lot of people might suffer. So you gotta have a high batting average here, Joe. You can't, you, you're gonna make a few mistakes, but you, you make those mistakes hopefully at a smaller level, not at the biggest level. And I've made plenty of mistakes at Whole Foods, and one of the reasons I've been successful is I've just learned from a lot of my mistakes. As I say, I have a lot of scars and, but they've made me better too.


Now, when you do have these very strong ethics and morals that you operate your company by, but you're also, you, you're incentivized by profit, do you make a conscious effort to explain or to espouse these ideas to the people that are working for you and work absolutely With you? We do. I mean, our quality standards, our core values, our higher purpose, these are all, we actually have a program in Whole Foods and now called Cultural Champions where people go through a program and get certified to be a cultural champion. And, and it's very important because, I mean, we have a hundred thousand people working for Whole Foods and every year we're hiring 10 to 20,000 new people.


Woo. Exactly. And so they're not gonna know the purpose, they're not gonna know the core values, they're not gonna know what the company's about or even they're not gonna know the history. You have to help, you have to continually educate and teach people who you are, what you stand for, otherwise it's gonna disappear. One thing you guys have done, and I don't know how you did it, a lot of people there are friendly, like how have you done that? Like in Boulder, I found people to be friendly. I found people to be friendly in Park City, Utah. I found people to be friendly in Los Angeles, in the valley, in the city. Like you've got a lot of friendly employees. Like is this something that's been like a core tenant of, of the business?


It Is. It's, it's one of our core values. We call it team member growth and happiness. We actually want our people working for us to be happy. And I'll tell you what I've learned, there's two things that people want at work above all else. I mean, they wanna earn a paycheck too. But besides, if you take, if you get the money right, there's two things that people want will, which will make them long-term committed to your organization. The first one is everybody wants to have a sense of purpose. They wanna feel like their work is actually contributing. It's, you know, they're not just making widgets, they're doing something that's actually creating value for other people. Purpose matters. And secondly, they want to feel like somebody gives a shit about 'em.


That, that they're cared for, that they're that. And if you do those two things, if you give people purpose and love, then you're giving them probably the two things they most desire in life is purpose and love. And we try to do that at Whole Foods. And to the degree people are friendly, it's partly because they're experiencing both of those, or at least one of them. What's great about that to me is that because your business has been so successful and it's such a popular spot for people and people are very aware that it's like that, my hope is that this is gonna be contagious and that other businesses are gonna go, you know, we are gonna follow the Whole Foods model and we are going to create an environment where it's family, people are loved, they're cared for, and then the people that come there, we want them to be appreciated.


We want everybody who works for us to be happy that they have a job here, feel like they belong, feel like they're doing something good. I absolutely agree. The second chapter of our book, conscious Leadership is Lead with love. Love is something that we don't think about in our corporations and we have these sort of hyper-competitive models, mental models about the way the world works. They're war metaphors, kill or be killed. We're gonna, let's go to the war room, let's, let's create our campaign. Let's go motivate the troops. We're using war metaphors or we're using Darwinian metaphors. This is survival of the fittest. It's a jungle out there, only the paranoid survive. Or they are sports metaphors where we're winners, losers.


And winning isn't everything. It's the only thing we, we've got this idea of hyper competition and when you're at war, there really isn't any place for love. I mean love, check it at the door cuz we got a war to fight we'll after that. So do that in your, in your personal life. And, and we're and love though the love, I don't mean romantic love, I don't mean sexual love. I mean the love that you feel towards the people you're working with, the people that you're serving, your customers that can't, that that's part of the most important part of being a human being. We have to bring that part with us to work. It ha can't hide out in the closet. We have to be able to connect with people.


And that's one of the great things that we need to have happen in corporations. If you're asking how can we make corporations better? Cindy Powell's talking about Release the Kraken. I'd say, is that what she said? That's what she's been saying. I would say, let's release love, let's let love outta the closet. Let's let love be what we build our organizations around. It's so much better way to live. The only argument I would say against that would be that you don't love your competitors. You're out there to kick their ass. Right? If you are playing on a team and you're supposed to go up against another team, you want to be as amped, up as aggressive, as motivated, and as focused on victory as possible.


That's why so many corporations adopt these sports metaphors. Right? Yeah. But that's the reality is that's, it's not that competition's not part of corporations or business. It is, is it the main part? It actually isn't. The main part is about creating value for customers. That's why the business exists. Competitors. And you, I never hated any of my competitors. I mean, I, I always saw my competitors as people that could teach me things, the things they were doing better than Whole Foods was doing. Like we, one of the best competitors Whole Foods competes against anywhere in the whole world is is h e here in Texas. Very very good competitor. And we've learned a lot from heb.


They've made us better as a company. And the wording, What'd you learn from heb? What have we learned from heb? If I was to be specific about It, how to hire sketchy late night counter people? No, They, no. Well, HEB opened up a concept called Central Market and that was back in the early 1990s. And it was a, took a lot of Whole Foods as ideas and expanded and made 'em bigger stores. So one thing I learned from HEB was to do bigger stores and, and we started getting progressively bigger stores. Those central market joints are pretty nice. They Are, they're, they're a worthy competitor. And so our competitors can be our allies in the sense that they help us improve how if you don't have a good competitor and then you're not gonna be pushed.


Look, take one of my favorite sports tennis. We happen to be blessed with possibly the three greatest tennis players of all time playing at the same exact time. Roger Federer, Roth Nadal and No, no Novik Djokovic and 2020 and 18 Masters or Grand Slam Championships. Those three guys are the top three of all time in Grand Slam championships. If, if they didn't have the other two, they wouldn't be the same player they turned out to be. Right. Because that pushed them to get better and better and better. And by the way, that is the beauty of capitalism versus socialism. There is competition, there is innovation that's occurring that you have to, you have to stay on top of.


You have to incorporate yourself and then you have to challenge to out-innovate the other people to stay ahead, so to speak. And socialism doesn't have that incentive to innovate and that's why it stagnates in the long run. So competition's part of business. I don't want to say it's not there, it's just not the most important part. It's not, it shouldn't dominate everything else. It has its place, but it shouldn't be the the be all reality of business End all be all. Yeah. And all be all. I understand what you're saying and I, I agree with you in terms of competition, obviously, you know, I come from a martial arts background and that's everything. If you don't have people in the gym that are better than you, you will not get better.


You, you don't want to be the man. Like you want to be surrounded by other people that are better than you. It's almost always the best way to improve and grow because you have a, a metric to gauge yourself by. You can compare against them and you also can study them. Yes. What, you know, how are they doing that? How are they doing that sidekick that Well One of the things Keeps hitting Me. They show you one of the beautiful things about martial arts. It's always been the case. Martial artists are very open collaborative. Yes. Very collaborative. Because that's taught like from the beginning, particularly in jujitsu. In jujitsu, it's, there's no secrets. Like everyone is trying to show you what they're doing.


Like one of my best friends is Eddie Bravo, who's a world-renowned jujitsu instructor and competitor. And he, he's like, I am teaching my students how to beat me. He goes, I'm getting these younger, faster, stronger people and I'm showing them all my, my tricks. And that makes me stay one step ahead. And this is like, this is the philosophy of martial arts. It's very, you, you never want to have no competition. That's a terrible place to be. It's the philosophy of excellence. Yeah. And excellence is a big part of corporations and it's a big part of capitalism. Yeah. It's a big part of everything. But when you actually go to a competition, you wanna smash that person. You don't wanna love them. Yeah. But you may be loving 'em after the competition.


Yes. Might be your best friend. I mean Sure. It's a friendly competition. You're not literally trying to kill them. Right. You're not really wanting to, to, to, for them to crack their head and they never get up again. This is a concept, this concept that we're describing, whether it applies to martial arts or to business, that a socialist would've a very difficult time grasping that you can both be loving and ultra competitive. And that these things are not mutually exclusive. And in fact they help, it helps. They Are yin and yang. Yeah. They, they, they, they work well together. So this is, if I'm, I'm gonna put words in your mouth. This is probably one of the things that frustrates you the most about these ideas, these progressive ideas, is that they, when they apply them to business, they don't really understand business.


They Don't work. Yes. They don't work. That's the problem. And, and, and that is the disaster of progressivism. You mean The people don't work or the ideas don't work? The Ideas don't work. The ideas don't work. But the ideas are f a great example is collective agriculture. You know, we're gonna put everybody, we're not gonna do individual farming plots. We're gonna, China almost put it starved itself to death. And you had millions and millions of people die from starvation by collectivizing the agriculture, even though the Soviet Union had already failed to do it. So China did it. And they forced all the people to collectivize their agriculture. And the des the result was terrible idea cuz they didn't have the incentives that were there any longer to try to optimize their production.


And as a result, starvation, mass starvation occurred until China wised up. They had finally some communists said, let's let them own at least a small little plot themselves that they get to keep what they produce for their families. And that proved to be so productive. It gradually took over the entire agriculture. They went back to capitalism in agriculture in China. So, Well wasn't that the issue with the, the colonists as well in, in America, when they first started growing wheat, they combined all their food together and then they realized like, hey, this is not working. Like we have to make people earn their own. You know, here, I think one of the reasons this idea will always be there, Joe, is that's how we operate our families, right.


When we're growing up, we're just small kids. The family shares, right? And you're, you're, and then we ask when we get older, why can't we make the whole society like the family? And the answer is because it's too damn big to do it that way. And when you try to do it that way, you get, you get the slackers and the people who don't want to work being parasites on the others and you end up with a free writer problem. And ultimately that's the problem with socialism is a free writer problem that they've never been able to solve for except through coercion and putting people in labor camps and things like turn 'em into slaves. So they can't solve that problem except by, by, by sort of super coercion.


And that's why it doesn't work. Why it's never gonna work. And why capitalism with all its flaws is a system that does work that we can make better, we can make more conscious, we can do it better than we're doing it today. What do you think about the concept of universal basic income? Yeah, I, you know No, I mean I don't think that's a good idea. But when you have a situation like a pandemic where so many people through no fault of their own are being forced out of work, they cannot work. That's that Temporary situation. But isn't that a good argument for universal basic income? At least for a temporary situation? Well, when people are sick, they need to be taken care of.


When they're healthy, they don't need to be taken care of. They need to stand on their own two feet. Right. But when you have a situation where they can't stand on their own two feet because they're literally not allowed to work like California. I mean California, they're, they're just, they're right now shutting down restaurants that g serve outside. Yeah. Well I mean the, the alternative is not to shut down the economy. Yes. No listen, I agree. But there's a lot of people that they get really hysterical about this and they think this is the only way we're gonna save people. There's a lot of people out there with terrible health and they think that what we need to do is shut everything down and that's the only way we're gonna be safe. I was reading this woman's Twitter the other day.


I just, someone said something ridiculous and I'm like, oh my God, I need to check this person out. And they were talking about, hey, you know, I am ready to lock everything down for five weeks. I don't go outside. I stay away from everybody. I order my, my groceries delivered. I'm ready to lock down for five weeks. I'm like, this is the most simplistic and individual perception of this problem that you, everyone should do what you're capable of doing. That most people can't do this if they have a fucking business. Like they can't, I'm ready to lock down for five weeks. Well congratulations to you, but some guy who runs some whatever, figure out whatever store it is or whatever kind of business they need to be there in order to be open, to stay a, to stay alive.


There's no other way to keep that business alive. They have rent, they have overhead, they have, they have employees. Do you know, you know the history of the 19 18, 19 19 influenza epidemic? Yes. That's the worst pandemic that we know of in our modern history. And that's only a hundred years ago. And 50 million people died worldwide. I mean, how many people died worldwide in covid? A couple million at this point. And the population was four times greater then they didn't shut anything down back then. What do you mean the population was four times greater than, No, it's four times greater now. Yes. Than then it was one 25%. It was 1.8 billion people back a hundred years ago across the world. So you could scale that up pretty, pretty largely.


Yeah, exactly. And that was the killer That didn't just take people with comorbidities. It took children, it took healthy adults. It, it was non-discriminatory disease. And we took precautions, people, you know, social distanced and, but at the end of the day, the economy did not shut down. Humanity went on with their lives. And this is not nearly the same type of pandemic that we had back then. It's, it's very interesting the time that we live and the reaction that we're having today to covid being so very different than the reaction we had to the influenza epidemic of 1918 and 1919, which was far more destructive.


It's, it's, I dunno, it's just food for thought. It's very interesting. Well, what was the difference, what's the difference in the reaction of today versus the reaction from 1918? The reaction back then was individual responsibility to, to do what was necessary to protect yourself and your family. But other than that, life went on and there was no governmental, not nearly the same level of They had mask mandates though, didn't they? If you, if you go back and read about it, that not any kind of national type of mask mandate, certain small communities did it. And it was just all so much smaller in scale. I Didn't even know they wore masks.


We've been looking at it cuz we've looking at a lot of photos from Yeah. Back in the day. It's kind of crazy to see. Cause they did. Yeah. And I mean people were scared and they wanted to protect theirselves and their family and they did what they thought was necessary. Yeah. It's just interesting how much different we're reacting to this one to me. And we are, we are doing great, great harm and we don't see the harm that we're doing. We don't see the small businesses failing. The suicide rates going up, the domestic violence, the isolation, the mental or emotional health problems people have by not being able to connect with each other. Not being able to physically touch Yeah. The kids that are are missing out in school and in person that speaking as, as a, as a man who was once a little boy, little boys need to, they need to play, they also need to connect.


They need to, they need, they can't just watch a screen. Yeah. Kids I have of, They need to be more interactive. Two kids in school right now and it's soul sucking, watching them stare at a laptop. Yeah. And then I sat in, in my daughter's room once and watched the teacher teach the class and Jesus Christ, this lady could have not been less motivated. It was horrible to watch. Yeah. Motivating or motivated. They're, they're, they're lazy. We're Hoping hopefully these vaccinations are, are gonna be as effective as they're reporting and will not have side effects. And that, that a year from now will be, this will be in the rear view mirror. Are you gonna wait, are you gonna dive right in? What if Jeff Bezos calls you up and says, Hey John, I got the, I got the vaccine right here buddy.


Not come over. You know, I haven't decided yet. I've had to do four covid tests, including one today to get in here. You only Had four. How many of you had, oh my god, I don't even know. Well you, you do it every time you come in here I Guess, right? Yeah. It's, we were trying to figure it out. I remember I counted like 50 something of 'em. But you've Done over 50 tests. Oh, way more than that. Yeah. So you'll be an early adapter of the, of the vaccination just so you don't have to do the damn test anymore. I wanna wait and see what's going on. But if, if it's proven that it doesn't have any side effects and how the fuck are you gonna do that? It might take a few years to know that for sure. Yeah. Can you wait? I don't know man. It's like I'm, I'm kind of a vaccination guy to be honest. Like I've as well, I've had all the vaccinations I have as well.


You can imagine. I think that No, listen, here's the thing about vaccines, man. Like if you even have a conversation about vaccines, people get their hackles up. What are you about to say? What are you saying? Are you an anti-vaxxer? Not an anti-vaxxer by any stretch of the imagination. I've been vaccinated, my children have been vaccinated. I believe in vaccines. I believe vaccines are the reason why we don't have smallpox. Right. Why we don't have polio. When I hear about measles cases rising, I get angry cuz these fucking hippies don't want to vaccinate their kids and they send them to school with other people's kids. And these people get fucking measles. It's, it's, and for adults it's dangerous. Right. Look, measles is a creepy disease.


I believe in vaccines. However, I believe that this is a new thing. Did you have measles? I don't think I ever got the Measles. Cause I'm older than you. I had measles. I don't know if I had, I had, I had all those diseases as cause there were novac, I had chickenpox, I had measles. Yeah. I had almost all that stuff. I mean, when I was a kid, there was no polio vaccination. Oh my god. I know. So when, when polio was running around in the community, they'd closed the swimming pools down. Yeah. That's when my mother would not let us go out and play for a while. Polio is a, an excellent example why vaccines are so important. Exactly. Because it was a terrifying disease that destroyed people and permanently. I know. And when I was a kid we would, when when someone have chickenpox, they would bring kids to that person's house.


So you would get chickenpox because if you get chickenpox as a young kid, it's better than if you get chickenpox as an adult. Right. I do not know why. Right. But they would, they would encourage kids to get chickenpox. So you build up an immunity to it. Yeah. My wife had shingles recently, so I went and got a shingles vaccination. Oh My goodness. Yeah. That's supposed to be horrible. That's really Painful Stuff, Right? It was Horrible. Yeah. Listen, I believe in vaccines, but I also believe that you're Not gonna be a Guinea pig. No. But there's people that have already done that. There's brave folks that have already decided to get shot up. Yeah. But you want your friends to do it and you want your friends to say, I did it and I feel fine. Everything's great. I'm no, I don't want that either. What do you want? I want them to assure me that it's not going to be devastating in terms of the side effects.


I would hate to have encouraged people to take something and then find out two years from now that there's some residual side effect That's devastating. Some neurological thing. Your liver is starting to fail. Who knows What it could be. And the way it's been described to me, that won't be the case. The way it's been described to me by doctors is that's an unfound fear because of what this is a, a messenger RNA vaccine. Right. That this is not the type of vaccine that you, it's just essentially delivering your body this sort of message that encoded with a common cold virus. That what it does is it makes your body develop the proteins to fight off the disease and give you, It sounds like these are vaccination breakthroughs.


Yes. Yeah. It might transform vaccinations in the future. I hope so. Listen, I hope so too. Look, I, I think modern medicine is amazing. I do worry about stuff though. Look, I, you know, I don't, I don't want to make a mistake and I don't think you do either. And when it comes to, I already admitted making lots of mistakes, but this is not one I want to add to my repertoire. Right. When It comes to this virus though, it's so difficult to be confident one way or another. Like if it was a virus that just, you go, oh, you'll, you'll survive 99 point whatever percent of people survive, you're gonna be fine. There's people that are these, this is what what gets me these long haulers? Covid long haulers who have like serious, like there's a guy named Cody Garbrandt, he's a former Banon way champion of the ufc.


He got Covid in August. He's a young stud, he's a healthy guy, like a top flight mixed martial arts fighter. And he has had blood clots. He's had like some serious problems and fatigue and still bothering him to this day. He was supposed to compete last weekend, just this past weekend. He's supposed to fight for the Flyweight title and he could not, he couldn't make the card. So they got a replacement for him. But it's because of Covid. If you wanna look at like young, healthy people, that is one of the best examples you're ever gonna get of a young healthy person. He's a, a, a professional cage fighter. I mean, he's really fucking healthy.


But Covid has done a number on him. Like he's got like some pretty serious issues. Yeah. I, and certainly I don't want to get covid myself, but the reality is pretty much you could have anecdotes for any type of disease. It's somebody that had a bad reaction to that disease. Yeah. But that's a rare one. Right. Blood clots and all this, the stuff that people are fatigued months and months later. For a coronavirus that is, it's unusual. And that's the problem is that this, well this disease has so many unknowns to it. It's, there's so many mysteries, so many people get it and they don't even know they had it. So it, it seems now that, you know, mono, which a lot of people get when they're teenagers, it turns out that that's connection to Epstein bar.


So I know people that had mono when they were kids or teenagers and now as adults, they have this Epstein bar, which is attacking their thyroid. So that virus never went away. It's still there. It's still affecting them. And it's the reality of, of existence. There are all these viruses out there. I mean like, I think a gallon of, of seawater has 10 billion viruses in it. I mean it's, it's, we live in a universe of viruses and 10 billion. Yeah. And a Gallon, I think it's even less than a gallon. Isn't that extraordinary? Viruses are real little. Those mass people wear those viruses.


You know, unless you got the, the n 95 s and plexiglass, chances are that little piece of cloth, there's not really keeping the virus Out. That's one of the things that freaks me out. Like when people dive in a lake somewhere and they get some brain eating ameba, A Surface drop of seawater. Not a gallon surface drop. One drop's got 10 billion, 10 million, 10 million. That's, well I guess maybe a gallon gallon 10 billion. If you do, that's A lot. That's a lot of viruses. So don't be drinking that seawater a drop A 10 million for a fucking drop. What do you do when you get a mouthful of seawater? You just, ugh, Here's the good news where we deal with viruses. Yeah. We got amazing immune systems and we've been evol co-evolving with viruses for hundreds of thousands of years.


Sure. And guess what, we're co-evolving with Covid now. Yeah. Well this has been my frustration the entire time is that there's been no discussion about strengthening your immune system. There's legitimate strategies, including there are eating healthy foods. Yeah. Right. I mean there's legitimate stratas strategies for keeping your body healthy and strong and keeping your immune system strong. Absolutely. I mean, it's interesting Joe, because I've watched my friends that during the eight or nine months we've been dealing with this stuff, maybe almost, yeah. Nine months. They tended to go one of two directions. One was to say, you know what, I'm gonna get this. I'm locked down. I'm gonna get super healthy.


I'm gonna eat right. I'm gonna exercise, I'm gonna get enough sleep. I'm gonna stop taking as many toxins. And they, they, they got healthier. They lost weight. Their immune system got strong and then had other friends, they were isolated. They felt lonely. Their, their consumption of alcohol went way up, for example. And they, and they gained weight and their immune system is less strong. Yeah. So humans respond differently to stress like this. Yeah. I went the route of saying, my best chance to hold off Covid is to get my immune system as strong as possible and went that route. Damn well. That's the, that's the right route to go. That's the route You better go if you own Whole Foods. Yeah. It's gonna be, I always say that won't be good for my business if I die of a heart attack.


Yeah. Right. At least not for another 20 or five or 30 years. You kind Of have to be healthy. There'll be a lot of people that will secretly laugh if I do croak from something like that. It's like, see a lifetime of eating all that healthy food. And he died at a young age. Do you practice what you preach? Are you a, a, a healthy eater or do you have like a few bad habits? I'm, I, I don't think I have any bad habits, but none. I, I don't think I have any bad habits, but I do occasionally indulge myself. But you say, would you indulge it? Habit. Oh, okay. Indulge with Probably, I mean, occasionally might have a bowl of coconut ice cream. That's it. Coconut ice cream.


That's how you go. Crazy. I didn't say go crazy. I said indulge myself. But in general, I mean, I booze, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm a hundred percent plant-based guy, so, and I eat lots of fruits and I believe that's Why you give me that fake cheese. Hmm. You're one of those, It's not fake cheese. It's almond cheese. I do call it cheese. Cheese, yeah. It's still animals from milk. It's coming from milk. Okay. It's coming from animals. And this is almond cheese coming from almonds. Yeah. But that's Like almond water or almond milk. Almond milk is not milk. It's almond milk. Uhuh, It's, no, it's some weird shit you're doing with water and almonds. It has nothing to do with milk. There's no tits on almonds. Come on, bro.


I, I think you can, if you look it up in a dictionary, you will not see cheese saying it must have tits to be cheese. No, but it's a, a milk product. You need to come up with a new name. I'm, I'm happy for it to come up with a different name, but yeah. Someone needs to come up with a better Name. I, I don't believe in the word police language. Oh. Language evolves sort of organically, so to speak. New words get at it all the time. Right. And I don't believe in the police that are trying to say that word can't be said that way. I Understand. So if you are a, a full plant-based guy, you don't need any meat at all. No. Even when you're drunk. No. I'm, you hesitated. That's what People do. Well, if I'm really drunk, I may not remember.


Well, you know, that's the thing. They say that like 84% of of vegans eat meat when they're drunk. Yeah. Did you ever hear the one about, I Made that number up. I know that 93.6% of the people make up their own statistics. I think it's a hundred percent. The, the thing about plant-based diets is you gotta really make sure that you're supplementing correctly. Right. You have to make sure you have a, a good, healthy supply of B12 and all your different, you know, I think acid, I think B12 is the only one you really have to worry About. The only one. What about amino acids? What about proteins? You ever heard anybody being deficient in protein? It's not also calorie deficient. Well, by deficient, meaning the reaction to their body.


Are their, are their bodies optimized? I would say no. Yeah. I mean, and, and yes, I have seen it because people, they lose body mass. They lose muscle mass. They lose strength and vitality. And I think you probably know that muscle mass and, and body mass strength is directly connected to longevity. You have to have enough protein so your body can repair itself, so that if you're lifting weights, you're gonna grow muscles. You have to have enough, you have to have adequate protein stores. But the extra protein, your body has to then go through complicated reactions to convert that into fuel, which actually puts the stress on the kidneys. On average, Americans eat about twice as much protein as they actually need You.


You talking about glucogenesis, like when you're taking Yeah. Protein and converting it into sugar when you're, that's damaging to the kidneys. Has there been real evidence that shows that You can do a search on it? Yeah, I have. I don't think there is. It's actually a natural progression when you're eating meat. If you're, like, there's people that are on meat only diets, and they, their body produces its own glucose. I mean, I think you'll, I hate to get into debate with you about this. You're getting into this weird plant-based debate. Plant-based people get real edgy when you, when you start talking about their diets. Oh, I'm not gonna get really edgy about it. Hey, I've got my book there for you. The Whole Foods of Diet. Take a look at it. Oh, take a look at it. So you allow plants on this.


Where's your steaks, Bro? We, we actually allow, in that particular diet, we allow up to 10% of your calories from animals. Oh, you allow it. Do you, did you always eat plant-based or did you slowly gravitate towards it? I was vegetarian in my early twenties, and then I added fish. And then back in 2003, I became a hundred percent plant-based. But for ethical reasons. I think that's why in the book, the Whole Foods Diet, we allow ethics aside, we think a little bit of animal foods is consistent with good health, primarily based on What about Mollusks? You know, one of the things that I've heard about mollusk is they're so primitive.


They're actually more primitive than plants. I don't know if they're more primitive than plants, but they don't have well-developed nervous systems. So they may not be able to experience pain. Yeah. As we know it. Like, as far as we know plants respond to stimulation, but we don't have any evidence they experience pain. Well, the idea is that, so Wallace might be consistent with ethical. Yeah. Veganism. I've heard that argument said very well in that not only that, but you, you could, they're sustainable. You can harvest them and grow them, and that their, their, their nervous system is set up. So they're, they're moving in some way. Like they close their shells and open their shells, but not in the sense that you wouldn't consider them an animal, but you can get animal protein from them.


By the way, you're, I really, you're we're talking about things like, to be clear, we're talking about things like clams, clams, Oysters. Yeah. Cause I think like an octopus scallops is, we're not talking about octopus. Oh, no, no. Those are super intelligent. Exactly. They're creepy, intelligent. You ever see them open jars or they spin the jar? No, but did you see the, that documentary that's just come out recently called My Octopus Teacher? No. Oh. Oh my God. It's fantastic. He should watch that show. There is a great Instagram handle to follow. Is it OC donation? Is that what it is? I think it's OC donation. See, see if you can, do you know what that one I'm talking about? There's a fantastic inst as it is. There's a fantastic Instagram page that just, they're in love with octopus and octopi, and they're constantly highlighting all the cool things about octopus and particularly their, their ability to camouflage themselves and hide.


Oh, they're amazing. I I, I just was diving just a few weeks ago. Yeah, look at this. Look at that thing, man. Oh My God. And they can change their colors. They're So cool. They're one of the coolest animals on the planet. No, there's no doubt about it. They're so strange. Like my friend Remy Warren, he used to have a television show called Apex Predator where he would basically study all these predators and their, the methods that they used to hunt. And he studied octopus. And he like, he's like, they're aliens. They are a show called Apex Predator, where he would basically study all these predators and their, the methods that they use to hunt. And he studied octopus.


And he like, he's like, they're aliens. They are aliens. He, he's showing me what they're doing. He's like, there's nothing like this. There's no other animal like this. And during the course of his show, like, he developed this like, profound respect and appreciation for octopus. They're amazing. I, I was on a, I was scuba diving just a few weeks ago in the US Virgin Islands on a night dive, and actually saw an octopus grab, get a, get a crab. Oh, wow. Plunged on the crab. And it just sort of discord of Sort. Did you ever see that video that they, they had to do a, like, they put a camera in a, in a tank at the aquarium because they were losing sharks and they were trying to figure out what the hell's going on. So they put a camera in there to watch in terms of the octopus were killing the sharks.


How big was the octopus and how big were the sharks? Well, the octopus was basically the same size as the sharks. Not, I mean, it wasn't a big shark, a small shark, but, you know, they'd never thought an octopus would hunt a shark. And the octopus was just sitting there chilling. All camouflage. And a shark sharks are kind of dopey, you know, sharks are not intelligent. They just swim around. They're just cleaners. They're just, they're, they're the cleanup crew. They eat a lot of things and kill a lot of things. And, but they're mostly cleanups. Yeah. And this, this oc watch this watch. You're swimming by and the octopus is like, bitch, come here. Just wraps 'em up. But the octopus looked exactly like the coral. Back it up again, Jamie. So we can see what it looked like. Go from the beginning.


Oh, it's a long, oh, okay. But the crazy thing is like you lit, look how it changes color, right? Before, yeah. It's almost like he sees red. And so it jacked this shark and slowly pulled it into its body and then just ate it up for Whatever it's worth. If you watch my octopus teacher, which is, you really got this unbelievable film work. The camera work is incredible. This guy follows this octopus around for a full year in, out the coast of South Africa. And he's a free diver. No tanks. You, he holds his breath for several minutes. And the, the big enemy of the octopus, there were sharks. These pajama sharks, they were called.


And they would hunt for the octopus, and the octopus would have to put away from Pajama sharks. Here it is. Yeah. Here it is. Octopus teacher Pajama sharks. I've never heard of a pajama shark. So this octopus is hanging out with this Dude. Oh yeah. They got to be buddies. That's so wild. There. There's a shark. Oh, wow. Oh no. He sees his buddy get jacked. Yeah. That's kind of rough. He didn't die from that though. What? The octopus Released one of his arms. He lost an arm and he grew it back. Do you know that female octopuses are much larger than the males? As much as like 25% larger than the males. And they, I didn't know that sometimes have sex with the males. And sometimes they pretend they're have Sort like, sort like humans kill Them and eat 'em.


They, they cannibalize the males. They, they'll hold onto 'em and eat 'em for days. Sort like the spiders do. Black widow spiders and Whatnot. Yeah, but different, because the black widows do it every single time. There's one, they observe this one octopus. He got real greedy. He made it with this female 13 times. 13. Imagine how annoyed she must have been. Well, she waited till the 14th time and she's like, not today, bitch. And she grabbed him and, and ate him and killed him. But because the female's far larger physically, the male has to be like real skittish about it. Like, Hey, what do you think? How you feeling today? Hungry. There needs to be a revolution in the, in the social structure of octopus.


And What are you laughing at to Make it more, to make it more equal. Yes. There's An Article about this and the first thing it says like, they have tricks. They do. The first thing that they do is they disguise themselves as another gal. It says it's sneak into a female den. Well, that's what cuttlefish do. That's the cuttlefish move. Oh, I love cuttlefish. Yeah. Male octopus. Hold on. What's the show? Sorry. I have a big problem. Female octopus is each male wants to mate and pass on his genes to a new generation. Trouble is the female's often larger and hungry than he is. So there's a constant risk that instead of mating, the female will strangle him and eat him. The males have a host of tricks to survive though. Yeah. Good luck. Some of them quite literally made at arm's length.


Well, you know why they, they actually release their arms. Each arm that an octopus has is actually a penis. So they actually, and they got eight of sucks. Yeah. They have sex with their arm. So when We have a lot, we, there's a lot we could learn. There's a lot we could learn from octopus. Yes. I don't know how they masturbate though. They could probably have a real problem. It's like rubbing penises together. It's not very productive. Like, but I think each arm is a penis. But for whatever they, either way their arm is most certainly a penis. And when the woman, the female octopus is attacking, they will release their arm. They literally will give her the arm. They let her snap the arm off, and then she eats the arm Better to keep the other seven arms.


Well, I guess yeah. That's, imagine, I mean, there's a divorce metaphor in there somewhere from Sex is dangerous. What can you say? Well, It's also weird. They regenerate their arms, which is pretty, pretty crafty. Yeah. You know, that's what, you know know when they catch stone crabs, they catch 'em and they just snap off their claw and then throw 'em back and they'll just grow a claw. Oh, you mean humans? People catch 'em. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. It's one of the weirder fish or weirder kind types of seafood because it's one of the rare ones where you can catch the thing, snap off one of their limbs and chuck 'em back. Like you can keep part of them.


And they still survive. Like, and they don't even Probably problem with it. They, I suspect they survive less long with only one claw than if they had a couple of Claws. Yeah, I would imagine there's, but They, they have a chance to survive. Yeah. They have a, a better chance, better Chance than if they just get immediately eaten. That ju just to correct that eight, eight arm penis thing. They only one, it says that they have, their main tool is their specialized mating arm. It works like the other arms, but it has some special ability to bend, stretch, and exert suction. So they have one arm that's a special penis arm. It has some extra bells and whistles as this says. Do They grow that one back if she steals it?


Let's see. Imagine that's The one you don't wanna offer up. Maybe, maybe you're tired of it. It's got a special tip. Obviously. Maybe they're tired of like worried about getting eaten. Like, oh great, she took my penis. Good. I could relax her a couple weeks while throws back, stay away from these vicious broads. They're goddamn cannibalistic instincts. So he only has one of those. Yeah. And it goes, there's a quick, there's a picture. I've no, I haven't seen a picture. Find out if that one grows back. There's the picture of what it looks like when they do it. Oh, Jesus. It has to go all the way. It's a Deep Oh wow. It goes into her, her brain, into her head. Oh my God. No wonder why she wants to kill 'em. It's probably annoying. Right.


Her ovaries are in the back of her head. That's nuts. So the testes, Wow. So he's got a, so his testicles to the back of his brain and her, what a strange animal man They are. They're, you said they're aliens. Yeah, they really are. I mean, if we found them on some far off planet, we would not be stunned. Like if, if we, they didn't exist here and we found them somewhere else, we'd be like, oh, alien life. We're, we're just so accustomed to some of the more bizarre things. Squid or also bizarre. Oh yeah. And, and, and saw cuttlefish. Yes. Cuttlefish. We were talking about cuttlefish before that. Eric Weinstein is one who told me about the cuttlefish strategy.


That male cuttlefish will pretend to be female. And they'll do that in order to trick the females into being friends with 'em. And then they, they get some like fem male feminists, basically the same thing. I'm Not gonna go there. This says that they have the, the, the whole old school I arm reach around like the guys doing like Movie theater, like at the movie theater. Oh. They don't even go inside the den. That's for them to safely mate. Oh. They'll reach in, slide it in and then just like, they're not even in the same room technically. Wow. They're just reaching and just get into her brain. What a b bizarre method of me mating, You know, Linking brains.


Females have, you know, they have different tastes. Yeah. Some of them do. Don't be sexist. Listen to this guy. Yeah. That's a weird animal to eat octopus because they're smarter than dogs. They're really smart. Do you, is intelligence one of the variables you use in determining what animals you'll eat and not eat? Yes and no. Because pigs are intelligent. But I'll eat wild pigs cuz pigs are invasive and it's a real problem in terms of like management of wildlife and the amount of animals that you have and what kind of destruction they can do to ground nesting birds and other, you know, species that are native to the area.


Invasive animals are a gigantic issue. And pigs in particular are one of the most devastating invasive species that we have in North America for sure. But worldwide in Australia, they're a giant problem. They're actually now a, an increasing problem in the hill country here. Oh Yeah. No, I have a friend that lives half hour out of town and he's got 'em, which is, that's not very far. Yeah. We wipe out their natural predators. No, there are no natural predators. Exactly. They've never had any here. They were brought in here from Russia and from other countries. They like, they're a very durable animal that breeds constantly. And they're natural predators are, you know, for, if you're gonna keep a population of pigs down, you gotta have some fucking monsters out there.


Like if you want to have their natural predators, their natural predators are not just gonna stop at pigs. They're going to eat all sorts of other animals and domestic animals and livestock and Like Yeah. Like they're invasive Big cats or, yeah. Or wolves would probably be natural predators for these pigs. But you need so many of 'em. They're so prolific. They breed so often. They breed three or four times a year. And the females, Joey, you've gotta get out there and help protect our land. No, I'm not the guy, but I will eat them and I will kill them. But the, the pigs, the wild pigs in the, when, when they're six months old, they're viable. So they, they start having sex and breeding at six months old and they'll, they'll breed a litter three times a year sometimes, which is crazy.


So they'll have four or five piglets three times a year. So one pig could be responsible for as many as 20 other pigs. One female in a year. And I have a friend who works on a ranch and he says, you have never seen anything like the devastation these things do when they move in and find a crop. Like, so if they'll have a crop of, of food that, you know, these folks need for their livelihood. And then a pack of wild pigs come in and just destroys it. Wow. Says it's pretty wild to see. And some of them are huge. We own a, we own a place 40 miles west of Austin and we see a lot of the pig pig scat plus where they dig.


So they're, we don't actually see them cuz they're nocturnal. Yeah. They hunt 'em at night. Yeah. Which is really crazy of friends that do 'em with night vision goggles and night vision scopes and you know, and there's people that hunt 'em with helicopters as well. Wow. Which is very unique to Texas. They have these helicopter hunts and they, they, they say that this, other than capturing them in traps, like there's one of the most effective ways to do it. Well, you've got me, I'm a grocer who sells meat, but I'm a plant-based guy who doesn't eat it. So you've got me in a Yeah. Paradox there. Well, that is that weird for you? Do you have a, an issue, an ethical issue with selling the meat?


Or do you make sure that the farmers or the ranchers that do sell you guys the meat hold up very strict ethics. We try to do the latter, although I'll tell you a story. The very first store I opened up before Whole Foods was called Safer Way. And it's vegetarian store and it, it, it was not only vegetarian, it was very pure. We, we, we didn't really sell sugar, refined sugars or white flour even didn't even sell coffee. And we also did very little business. We were not, we were, we were so narrow in the marketplace, we weren't successful. Mm. And it wasn't until we, we relocated that store, merged with another store, changed the name to Whole Foods Market, and opened a bigger store that sold meat, coffee, alcohol, you know, all Nat Natural and Organic foods, but a full spectrum that this, that we became successful.


So was that in many ways like a battle for you? A little bit because you have this one idealistic perspective of what a supermarket could be versus this Is the most battle. It it, I put it this way, it's like, what I learned is that in order to do the most good in the world, in order to help the most people, you have to be willing to meet the marketplace where you find it. If you stand, try to stand above the marketplace and you're too pure for the marketplace, then you're not gonna help anybody. You're gonna fail. You're gonna go outta business. Ultimately customers vote, they decide whether you prosper or fail. And safer wave was going to fail because we would, would it be possible to do it today?


Maybe. So today, the world's different today than it was in 1978. But back then we were gonna fail. We lost half our money in the first year In 1978. Starbucks wasn't around, was it? No. Oh no. Actually Starbucks was they, they, I don't think they were around. They were getting close to being around. Nobody Knew how addictive Coffee was back then. Oh yeah, they did. But they didn't really, They did, but they were drinking instant coffee. Like Folgers and actual house, but Right. Or Dunking Donuts. That's where I used to drink. But I never thought that coffee would be a thing that would be on every corner. Like there's a place in Houston and Lewis Black used to have a joke about it, where you'd be on, it was in River Oaks.


It was across the street from another Starbucks. There was a Starbucks across the street from another Starbucks. It was the strangest thing. I was like, well, New York City, they got on practically in Manhattan on every block. Yeah. But this was across the street. Well there, there was a cartoon once that said, I just opened up a Starbucks in the bathroom. Starbucks in, in the bathroom of a Starbucks. But people are so addicted to it, it's so strange how addicted they are to getting their Starbucks fixed. You know, they use their apps and show. So when you were selling no coffee back then, were you doing it because you don't believe in coffee, you think coffee's bad for you? Or did you make a decision? Is it a fair trade issue?


No, it was, we just didn't think it was a healthy food. Hmm. So we didn't sell it. And then now we do sell it. We sell probably, I'm sure we sell probably one of the largest coffee distributors in the United States now. Probably. Yeah. You probably are. I think out of, I think they've done studies on moderate coffee consumption that have shown it to not have a detrimental effect. There's no nutritive value in coffee, except for perhaps some antioxidants. But the studies do indicate that moderate consumption of coffee is consistent with longevity. Yeah. So I don't think it's a, it's not a, it's not like smoking cigarettes.


It's not in, There's a cognitive benefit to it too, that some people think it's worth the squeeze. That's a mental stimulant. Yeah. Problem is, I'm, I have to admit that I'm a decaf guy. I, I got off a coffee and, But it tastes like shit. Why not your shrink? I'm gonna sneeze. That's so dangerous today. Thank God I've been tested ab Absolutely. Unless you got infected and it hasn't shown up yet. No, I didn't. But tea, tea tastes better. Why don't you drink tea? Why would you want decaf coffee? I, I, I like decaf espresso tastes really good. You have to, I like regular espresso. I want to, I wanna feel the juice getting in the veins.


Well, The darkness I've taken that I, I was recovering. I, it took me, when I got off of caffeine back in the year 2000, I had, first of all, I had physical withdrawal symptoms of headaches that lasted horrible headaches that lasted, took about a week before the headaches went away. Really? And then I was exhausted. I was tired and all I could think about if I would have a cup of coffee or some tea right now, I'd feel good again. I'd have energy back. Yeah, exactly. Should have done it. However, however, after 30 days after 30 days, I'd gotten the caffeine outta my system. Text caffeine about seven days to completely live, leave your system. And my, my adrenals began to be reestablished. I kind of got my own energy back.


Okay. You know, that's bullshit. What adrenals? That that what you just said is bullshit. That you're taxing your adrenals. That's some voodoo nonsense that those holistic people like to tell you. I don't think that's true. Yeah, no, I've read it. There's, there was a study on it recently where they were talking about like what it would actually take to tax your adrenals. And then what people are talking about is it withdraw from caffeine, which is real. Let Me, let me, let me withdraw that statement because that wasn't the real point of it. The point of it was that once I got my own vitality back, it was, I was no longer at the serv. I was no longer servant of the caffeine, which would determine when I felt good and when I didn't feel good. I just had my natural flow of energy and vitality.


And having compared the two states, this is a preferable state in my mind. I feel a lot better. I believe that percent. The, the problem I was having is that, that adrenal thing, it's, it is a thing that people say, a lot of people say, I'm Not a, I'm not a, that's what I've read. So, but I don't know it for any certainty, so I'll withdraw. Yeah. I've read it too, Too. But what I do know is I felt a lot better when I got off a, Well, I'm sure When I got off a caffeine, you Have a, I mean, it's a stimulant and that's what caffeine is. And you gotta pay that. You create a debt, you gotta pay that stimulus back. Yeah. But I was, I recently read this article by a nutritionist that was explaining like, what would have to be, what what would have to go wrong in your system for you to tax your adrenals.


And that's just not how it works. And that you're just dealing with a stimulant and that your body's getting off of that stimulant. And like any other stimulant, there's gonna be a withdrawal. Right. But it's not that you're taxing your adrenals. Okay. Yeah. But see people say things like that. Like you're polluting your kidneys or damaging your kidneys by letting, eating too much protein. You know, what can I say? I've read possibly different studies and articles than you have in different books. Well, I've Had too many people explain things to me here where you, you know, I had some ideas that I had in my head that I thought was correct in terms of nutrition and what's good and what's bad for you. And you Let me, let me give you a couple of facts that, oh, please do.


That you might find interesting. First of all, there's been only one diet that's been proven to reverse heart disease. And that is a whole foods plant-based diet. It's, I don't think that's true. I know what you're saying, but I I've actually read that that's not true either. That this proven to reduce heart disease, that that's not what's reducing heart disease. What's reducing heart disease is healthy behaviors. And that you're making this change in terms of eliminating toxic foods and do you any processed foods. And So do you have any other studies that show you can reverse heart disease without being on a Whole Foods plant-based diet? Reverse it. Reverse it. See that's the thing, it's like nutritionists have explained to me that there's a giant flaw and these epidemiology, this is Not epidemiology Citing, this Is not epidemiology.


How's, how would you That control, these are controlled studies. Dean, Dean Ornish and Caldwell Selden. They're the two giants Reversing heart disease just because of a plant-based Diet. Just strictly, no, not just a plant-based diet. A whole foods plant-based low fat diet has been proven to reverse it. I don't know if that's true. It is true. Okay. We're gonna find out if it is when Jamie will pull something up, because I've read something about how that was bullshit too. And it was by, In, in my book by the way. So my, the studies are in the book The Whole Foods. Oh, I'm sure you've read some things to say that. Let, let me give you the other facts. Okay. So do you know about the Blue Zones? Yes, I do. Okay. Well five Blue Zones, they're diets are remarkably similar.


They're basically eating about on average, according to Dan Butner. Good guy to have on your show sometime. Well, Like you are Belinda, right? You're Belinda, California Lo Loma Linda Loma Linda. That's Right. Loma Linda the seven day. What is your, Linda? I'm thinking you're ba Yeah, I think you are. We're talking about caffeine. We're talking about caffeine. You got, that may be you're talking choice. You're, But you know that one's, that's a Seventh Day Adventist. Right? But there, but there's also the, the Okinawa Ikaria Greece. Right. You understand healthy user bias. Right. And this is like the great example of the Seventh Day Adventist. They don't drink any alcohol. They exercise every day. There's, they have many more positive habits and you apply those positive habits.


And the fact that eat a vegetarian diet, you could assume that the reason why they're healthy is because of the vegetarian diet. That's not what I'm saying. Because none of the blue zones, except for a small subset of the seven Day Adventists are actually vegetarian. Most of them just eat small quantities of animal foods. About 10% of their calories, which is what we recommend in this Book. Right. But they're almost all very active people. Yes. But we don't have any examples of longevity in any culture that eats a heavy meat diet. None. Longevity. Like longevity. The messai living The Messiah, the average, you know, the average age of a Messiah? No, I don't. 45. Well, Don't they fuck up lions with spears? Whatever's not Risky business.


It may be, but it's not a good example. Yeah, we How, how about the But I was just saying Inuits, that's another one that's used. They're usually, they, they have the highest heart disease problem. Stop right there. Okay. Because that's not normal. This is a, a recent occurrence with them because of cigarettes and alcohol, western diet and changing the way they live, like the, the introduction of cigarettes and alcohol is what's fucked those people up. I'm merely saying, and I put the challenge to you. Show me examples of long-lived peoples that are heavy consumers of animal foods. Well I don't know of there are any specific long-term studies that have been done on people who are eating a lot of animal food and are also very active and, and healthy and making healthy choices outside of that.


The problem with alcohol and cigarettes and all these other things that people tend to eat, tend to take in and consume when they're also consuming animal foods is that all those things get lumped in together. I agree there. And the blue zones doesn't claim that it's just diet. It, they actually believe there's many factors. There's the amount of movement that people do, the healthy community that they have some type of purpose, higher purpose spirituality or, or a junk. If you're eating the vegan cheeses all the time, You're saying whole foods, whole Food, plant-based diet, vegetables, lots of fruits and vegetables, beans, whole grains, small quantities of nuts and seeds.


That's of extremely healthy diet. And if you add a little bit of animal foods to it, then it's still gonna be a really healthy diet. And that's what the blue zones do. I think we, we can all agree on is that eating toxic food, eating processed food, not healthy. Yes, we do agree on that. Not exercising, living a sedentary lifestyle, consumption of cigarettes and alcohol. All these things are detrimental to your health. Absolutely. I'll even go so far as to say that a, a vegan junk food diet is about the most unhealthy diet you can eat cuz you're just eating processed foods. Yeah. Animal foods are actually whole foods. Right. And they have a variety of nutrients in them. You can get 'em all from plants except for B12.


So what do you think is bad about animal foods other than the ethics From a health standpoint? The, it depends on how much you eat. And if you eat too much of it, then we see the, the heart disease. We see cancer. These all correlate very closely with The Right. But now you're talking about epidemiology studies. Yes. But epidemiology, we can't do controlled studies on people over the long term. So. Right. But you understand that the people that you're seeing high rates of cancer and heart disease aren't consuming grass fed steak and salads. What they're consuming is cheeseburgers. I understand. And fries and milkshakes and soda and all sorts of bullshit. So when they do a study on someone, they say, how often do you eat meat? And they say, I eat meat five days a week. And they go, oh, well look at the incidence of cancer.


And people that fill out the study and say they eat meat five days a week. That's where I understand Take these correlations and connections. It's Like, it's like I do this debate all the time too. And so I, I understand your position on this. And all I would say is find the other, where are the epidemiological studies to support your point of view? There aren't any Well, well epidemiology studies, it's a point, my point of view. What do you mean? If you wanted an epidemiology study that supported the fact that animal foods are not bad for you, you would have to find groups of people that only eat animal foods and don't consume alcohol and cigarettes. And then compare 'em to people that do and find out what the variables are.


Right. I think people who do consume cigarettes and do consume alcohol and do consume processed foods and sugars and excess, you know, corn syrup, foods and all, all the shit that we know as a part of a standard American diet. Right. Are you saying that people that consume animal foods are more likely to consume processed food, cigarettes and alcohol? Yes, They are. Because people have been told that animal foods are bad for you. So when people are like, fuck it and they just have a cheeseburger, particularly if you're talking about the average American, the average American, they're getting their meat. They're probably not eating a grass fed ribeye. They're probably eating a cheeseburger that they get from jack in the box or someplace like that. So you're getting processed foods, you're getting meat, but you're also getting sugar and corn syrup and all sorts of other nonsense.


That's the problem with these epidemiology studies. And you know that. Yeah. But you're, you're talking about a, a pretty small group if you've got the whole world to work from there. And lots of the world eats animal foods that are grass fed and the same type of results show up there, generally the more animals The same type of results in terms of what the term heart disease and cancer and, and, and with people that occasionally like what, what, like what are the, what are the studies you're talking about? I can, would you like me to send you some studies? No, I wanted you to tell me right now because you're saying it like, you know it for a fact. Like what studies are showing that people that consume grass fed meat and vegetables are showing the same levels of heart disease and cancer as people that eat the standard American diet.


Since I don't have those studies in front of me, They don't, they only exist. Well, parsing out the standard American diet if you both degrees Toxic. I I can send it to you. It's toxic. Be eating horseshit and drinking soda. It's not good for your body. No, it's terrible. Right. Well that's where we agree. We agree. Processed foods are bad. So when you're getting this standard American diet and you're Applying it To epidemiology study where they're saying, oh, this person eats meat five days a week. Well, what else do they eat? The problem with those studies is they're so flawed. If you, I'm, if you making someone fill out a form, You're having an argument with somebody besides me, somebody you've had an argument with in the past. Because I'm not saying that you're, you're overreacting the things that I'm saying based on some other discussions you've had in the past, I Don't think I'm overreacting.


If you're interested, I will send you studies. I mean, and I I can, I can tell you that the studies contradict what you're saying and that the epidemiology cannot do because it's not as good as a randomized controlled study, which are hard to do. A nutrition does not make them worthless. It just means that they're not a complete answer. But they, they do point in certain directions, But they're conveniently pointing to this meat argument versus all the other stuff they're eating. Which we've shown to be bad for you. It's people have been eating meat since the beginning of time, But not in very large quantities. Generally Depends on what people, Yeah. Depends on which people, I mean people that have been around buffalo and that's all they could eat, they ate nothing but buffalo.


So The, the animals that we are closest to from an evolutionary standpoint are the chimpanzees, the bonobos and the gorillas. Were not exactly the same, but they're the closest relatives we have in nature. The gorillas are a hundred percent and by the way, they're pretty damn big. They get enough protein. The Gorillas, well they have a completely different digestive system. Not completely different. It's very different. They eat only leaves and and grass and bark and shit. You know, it's very different. The chimp big, they get enough protein. The gorilla, They have a completely different digestive system. Not completely Different. It's very different. They eat only leaves and and grass and bark and shit.


You know, it's very different. The chimpanzees are about 95% plant-based and they're the closest to us. They're about 99%. They Gets so excited when they kill monkeys. Have you ever watched those videos like the David a videos They, they eat about, they eat about 5% of their calories. Studies show they eat about 5% of their calorie man foods. And again, I'm not arguing that we don't eat any an humans. We clearly evolved as omnivores, but in general we were mostly gatherers who we couldn't preserve most animal foods. We didn't have the technology to preserve it. So we feast it when we could get it. But you could smoke some of it and dry some of it for jerky. But in general, we didn't have massive supplies of animal foods. We were mostly eating plants with a little bit of animal foods.


That might be the optimum human Right. But you also understand that most plants are inedible. Most plants are inedible. True. Yeah. And most animals are edible. That's probably true. So what? Yeah. So whenever they do you think got a chance to eat plants, there was a lot more be real careful with what they could eat and what they couldn't eat. Because most of it was inedible and much of it even toxic. Most. Whereas if they can catch an animal and eat it, they're almost all edible. How Many different animal foods do you eat? How many different ones? Yeah. Gimme a rough estimate. Eggs. Meat, fish. No, but maybe 20 different kinds. Probably something like that. How many different plant foods do you eat?


Well, I live in a western society where I can go to whole foods and I can get tomatoes and all kinds of avocados. Stuff that's not even grown here. I mean when we were, When we were, It's a different world. When we were foraging, we knew what were toxic plants because we'd had our grandparents people Died from Exactly, Yeah. And so, but there was a huge variety of plants. We ate massively diverse diets when we were out foraging. Right. Probably far more diverse than we ate today. Even though there's a whole foods market. Just cuz there were so many different foods out there in the wild, in the, in the woods and the jungles. This will have to be a conversation that we can have at another time.


Probably. But what's your point? I I, I agree with you that there's probably a, a lot of different plants. Well I was, I was talking about, well the, you were saying that, that we can eat any kind of animal, but we can't any eat any kind of plant. And I'm saying there's so much more abundance of plants to choose from than in our normal diet or in our, when we were foragers than animals. Animals were a smaller for sure a much smaller percentage of our total calorie consumption probably Cuz they're really hard to catch. But they also think that one of the reasons why we became human beings was because of hunting. And that's directly correlated to the increase of brain size. Cooking meat and hunting and having more access to proteins. You Understand? That's a theory. That's not science, that's just a theory.


Right. It's one of the most probable theories. One of the most accepted theories. One of, in terms of the increase in human brain size. It's Prob there's an equally theory that, that probably when we became root eaters is when we, where they got brains. I've never read that theater. Yeah. That theory rather, when we became root eaters, that's when our brains grew. We started eating tubers. Yeah. How Come rabbits aren't gigantic brains? They're not big tube eaters. They're they're leaf eaters. Rabbits eat carrots, man, you watch Bugs Bunny. Yeah. So how do those blue whales get so damn big? Just eating crill. Plankton? Well, they eat a lot of things. They don't eat. Just eat plankton. No, I think the blue whales are plankton eaters.


That's It. That's all they eat. I think there, there are other whales that are definitely eating. Yeah. Listen, we're not whales. Right. This is gonna be a weird conversation. The whales have still never figured out how to grow fingers. We're we're humans. So we're we're great apes and we're, we've evolved similar to what, but I don't, Apes don't like those. How come this animal can do it? We're, we're not that animal. We know from the blue zones that the people that eat mostly plant-based diets live the longest. There's such massive amount of evidence if you'll open your mind to it. Oh well Listen, my mind's open. Those blue zones are also people that are very active. The, there's a direct correlation between physical activity. Yeah. I think the people that live a vegan diet that, that follow a vegan diet but are healthy and exercise are far better off than someone who lives a sedentary lifestyle and even even eats healthy meat.


I think the key is healthy equal. Like if you're gonna be a healthy person, you need physical activity. And that there's a direct correlation between physical activity and longevity and health benefits. Of course. Absolutely. Right. Well this is what you see a lot in these blue zones as well, right? Yes. That, I mean it, I'm merely saying what's true, there's one factor, diet is a factor. It's not, it may be one of the most important factors, but it's not the only factor for longevity. But the longest lived peoples, what they have in common is they all move, they all have families and communities. They, and they also mostly eat plant-based diet.


Whole foods. Plant-based diets. That's mostly what they eat with some animal foods. I'm not, none of them are vegan except for a small subset of the Adventist. But they are mostly plant-based eaters that have a small, 10% of their calories are animal foods. At least that's what the studies Show. This studies also show that they're also very active. Yes, they are very active. Yeah. I Just, not because they're out running around, but just because their natural lifestyle moves are out. You find anything, I mean there's a lot of stuff in this topic. Wish I, I need To have my own research. I need to have my own researcher That I read recently, I think the article was basically stop saying that a vegan diet reverses heart disease. And it was explaining all, all the problems in that logic.


I Didn't find that specific one. But there's an article here from the British Heart Foundation that talks about this and I think that started with a small study of 22 people that did plant-based and four of them had some reversal. This article here though, currently goes into deeper studies and says that there isn't really a good study about it. Exactly. From What I can find to This, mind you, a study published in 2014 looked at 198 patients to further investigate whether eating a strict plant-based diet could stop or reverse heart disease. Had found that of the 177 patients who stuck to the diet, the majority reported a reduction in symptoms and 22% had a disease reversal confirmed by test results.


But that study didn't just rule out animal products. It also cut out added oils, processed foods, sugar, refined carbohydrates, excess salt, fruit juice, avocados and nuts. Physical activity was also encouraged and prescribed medication continued. This is the problem with saying that and this, this is not just, there's not just one of these that's like this. It's basically the same thing. You're talking about people that make healthy choices and that's what's reverse heart disease. Also change their diet and ate healthier. But not just ate plant. I mean not just ate plants and a plant-based diet, but also remove processed foods and sugars.


Of course a whole foods plant-based low fat diet. That's the three that's proven to reverse heart disease. Yeah. But all three, these people also cut out sugar, refined carbohydrates. Those are, those are not whole Foods Juice. Those Are not whole foods. Exactly. But they cut out the bullshit that was killing them. It wasn't that plant-based diets were reversing heart disease. They cut out the things that were killing them. This is what the, the other article that I'd, I wish I could find it. So I guess what I'm saying is show me a study that people eat, cut out all the processed foods, eat a high percentage of their calories in animal foods, say 30 40% of their calories from animal foods in reverse heart disease.


There hasn't been any Studies is showing that the people are cutting out toxic things that we know are toxic. I don't believe animal foods are toxic. I think people have been eating animal foods from the beginning of time. So Sure. I think the problem is these things that we haven't been eating since the beginning of time. Process. Carbohydrates, sugars, fruit, juice, all the bullshit, vegetable oils, all these things that people have been adding to their diets fairly recently. That coincides with a direct uptick in heart disease. So your hypothesis is, first of all, I, I don't Have a hypothesis, this is just shit that I've read. Okay. So what you believe from the shit you've read is that you could eat a high animal food diet, cut out all the processed stuff and you'd reverse heart disease.


I think that if I have heart disease, I have clogged Heart disease is because they eat shit and they don't exercise. I think that is where heart disease is coming from. I don't think plants are gonna fix your heart. I think it comes from both. And you think it just comes from the processed foods? That's where we part company. Yeah. That is probably where we part company. I think plants are good for you. Don't get me wrong. So I think eating healthy and eating whole foods we both agree are good for you. Sweet. I just don't think that meat is bad for you. I don't think in small quantities meat is bad for you. But I think in large quantities it starts to clog up your arteries and your propensity to cancer goes up. Cause I think that's what the science shows. I don't think the science does show that.


I don't think the science shows that large. I'm gonna send you the studies. Clogs your heart Clog begins to clogs. Clogs your arteries. Is that what happens? The High fat content of the, of the meat over time clogs up your arteries. Yes. Yeah. I'd like to sit you down with a doctor who disagrees with you. Well and have you go back and forth with it because it's a complicated issue. Diet is a very complicated issue and it goes along with so many different things that people choose lifestyle choices. When you see the results, like how healthy or how sick you are, there's a lot of factors that go into there. But people that are plant-based tend to lean on that one factor. They tend to lean on this one aspect of their lifestyle choices. That seems to be improving health.


And I don't think, I don't think you could do that as much as, I don't think that you can lean on meat as being a cause of cancer when you look at epidemiology studies with people that eat meat five days a week but also consume a bunch of bullshit. Yeah. So clearly we're gonna not agree on this one. Well I think we need to make studies that show, like if they had a study where they took someone or took a group of people, a large group like in that study and they took them off of the standard American diet and fed them grass fed beef and vegetables and then had them exercise on a regular basis. Sure, I bet we would see similar results. First of all, if you did pen again, it's a matter of degree.


If you're feeding people vegetables, fruits, and vegetables and they're not, and you take out all the shit, that's a pretty healthy diet. Yeah. Right there. Yeah. It's just not the healthiest diet I think you could eat, but it's a lot healthier than the standard American diet. So you're gonna get some good results on it. I'm merely saying and that the, the studies that we know that have actually reversed heart disease cut out all the shit and also limit oil or don't have any oil limit, total fat consumption and also limit animal foods. That's worked Now maybe others will work as well. As you say, we should do a study where they eat 30% of their calories in animal foods, cut out all the processed carbohydrates and see if that reverses heart disease.


I agree. Let's do the study. But as far as I know, no study's been done. So that for now, based on what we know now, we do know that if you eat a whole foods plant based low fat diet, you can reverse your heart disease cuz it's been proven repeatedly. We do know that if you cut out all the shit that we know gives you heart disease, it will reverse heart disease. And if you eat whole foods along with that and exercise, you'll be healthier. What we don't know is that meat gives you cancer. We don't know is that meat gives you heart disease. I'm not saying that meat hurts you. First of all, I never said that meat gives you cancer, But you said that, I'm saying Plant-based diets has been shown to reverse heart disease. I don't think that's what we can say. I'm gonna send you, I'm gonna, I Think what we can say is that cutting out all the things that we know are very unhealthy, exercising and eating plants are probably good for it because they're whole foods.


You can say that we, we aren't certain that the meat is a contributing factor, but we cannot say that the studies that have reversed, it didn't include meat. Now maybe meat was neutral, maybe it had nothing to do with it. So you might be right. I'm not saying you're wrong, but I'm saying that you don't have any studies on your side in reversing heart disease and the meat has been cut out along with the crap and heart disease gets reversed. Maybe meat had nothing to do with it. Maybe if they, if they kept the meat in, they still would reverse heart disease. But no, studies have shown that. That's all I'm saying. But this study is all changing lifestyle. It's not just a plant-based diet. That's Right. I'm not saying it is.


I'm, I mean it's, well, that's the problem actually. Est, essel, essel studies, they only changed diet. Ornish changed. He had people moving and meditating. Essel, if you read, prevent reverse heart disease by Coldwell Essel in his studies, all he did was control for diet and that and it, and well, it's amazing statistic, the amount of people that reverse their heart disease. So we'll have to, we'll have to have a further conversation. I'm gonna send you, I'll send you some data and some stuff. I think the idea that meat is not but bad for you is a fairly recent idea. I think that people have been, first of all, you have to go back to the sugar industry bribing scientists to say that saturated fat and not sugar is what caused heart disease.


And I'm sure you're aware of that. Right. I'm, I've had a debate with Nina, Ty Schultz, and I've argued with Gary Tobbs before. So I see it differently than they Do You see what differently? The, the fact that the sugar industry bribed scientists? No, That sugar, You know about that though, right? You're gonna have to read through my book. Okay. But before I do that, you know that the sugar industry has been proven to have bribed scientists to alter results so that they prove, well they're pointing to the idea that it was saturated fat that was causing heart disease instead of sugar. They're, You know about that, right? I I know that sugar's bad for people, But, but you know that scientists were bribed by the sugar industry.


This has been proved. The New York Times wrote a whole story about it and we already said they never lie. I think we didn't quite come to that conclusion. That's What we said. But you do know that they did that, right? That it it has been proven that the No, I don't know that, I don't believe it's been proven that sugar causes heart disease. There might have been a bri That's not what I said. Yes. That's what I said. That, that the sugar industry bribed scientists to try to alter public opinion and show that it was saturated fat that was causing heart disease and take the blame off of sugar. Right. I do believe that saturated fat is a contributing factor to heart disease. And I believe the evidence is pretty overwhelming.


50 years ago, sugar industry quietly paid scientists to point blame at fat. So what? Well, that's a big deal, man. It it changed the way people think about diet because people were saying, oh my God, saturated fat is giving you heart disease. I think it is, and they were poor. Okay. But this is why people started thinking this way. They were thinking this way because of the sugar industry, the sugar industry bribing scientists, regardless of whether or not Right now, regardless Now of whether or not we agree or disagree on anything else. You don't have to, don't think this is a giant issue. You don't think the dairy industry, the egg industry and the cattle industry bribe scientists.


They, they, they do. I Would like you to show me some studies. Oh my God, Have They, you see how we can do this? They fund, see how we can both do this? Sure. They fund, they fund studies to Yes, they do In order to try to prove their products are healthy for People. They fund studies to try to prove their products are healthy. But do they bribe scientists to lie, Joe? If they do show Me, no one's defending the sugar industry. Right. I think you're, I think you're making a logical fallacy. The fact that the sugar industry acted unethically, that proves that saturated fat doesn't cause heart disease. No. Or contribute to it. It changes the perception of people when it comes to meat and health. It and it, and I think it did. And I think it has ever since then, the people saw this and read this and in their mind, meat became saturated fat.


Saturated fat became heart disease and it became a dangerous thing to eat too much meat. So here's an interesting question for you. How much do you think total animal food consumption's gone up in the United States per capita in the last 80 years? I would assume it's probably pretty high. Yeah. It's gone way up Because we have more access to food, right. With factory farming and We're, we are eating Fast food. We are eating more animal foods than ever before. Right. We're also eating more so The sugar industry, the sugar industry failed. The sugar industry failed in its task to, to get people to stop eating Meat. No, it didn't because the task wasn't to try to get stop to people to stop eating meat. It was to get people to not worry about eating sugar and consume more sugar and not have any fear about the health consequences of consuming sugar.


Because it wasn't sugar that was giving people heart disease. It was fat. Nobody's defending sugar in this discussion. I am certainly not defending sugar. Why They bribe people? They didn't bribe people so that people would hate fat. They bribe people so they would take the blame off of sugar. I, I, I already concede that point. But it doesn't make saturated fat good for people in large quantities. It's not. It's clearly not. And I will send you studies on it and actually I've got it in my book and I've got studies quoted in the book. So, well, I don't, I don't know if that's true. You know, I mean, there's been a lot of people that have eaten what they call it, carnivore diet and reversed a lot of symptoms that they've had with autoimmune diseases.


And there's different people that have different reactions to foods. There's certain people that eat nuts and they get deathly ill. There's certain people that eat 'em and they, they, they're very healthy. It's true. Yeah. There's people that have vegan diets and they don't have any problems with it. And there's other people that have severe issues with it. That's true. There's diversity and there may not be one diet that's gonna solve all human problems. No, I don't think there is. I don't think anybody would say there is anybody that's being ethical and honest. I think human beings, biodiversity in human beings is pretty extreme. You know, depending upon where your ancestors came from, depending upon what body type and blood type, there's a lot of different issues. That's my problem.


I don't think that you could say that a plant-based diet is the right diet for everybody or that it's good for everybody. I didn't say that. I don't say it in my book. No, You did say it's the only diet that's been shown to reverse heart disease and I don't really think it has. But the burden of I've, the burden of proof is to give me one study where it's not, where that's not true. Well, So I've, I've made the claim, I prove Me wrong. There's a lot of factors that led to reversing that heart disease. And I think when you look at all those factors, particularly the eliminating sugar that we know is a toxic substance, the adding of exercise, the eliminating of oils, all these different things that we know are not good for you, I think those are contributing factors.


Yeah. If you wanted to say, it's been shown that a whole foods plant-based diet plus eliminating all these toxic things have been shown to reverse heart disease. I'd be right there with you. Good. The problem Is, that's, That's what I'm saying. Everybody eliminates that part, including you. No, you left that out. Well, when you said it, you said whole food, plant-based diet. You didn't say eliminating all these things that have known to sh that have been shown to cause heart disease. Sure. What is a Whole Foods diet? You go to Whole Foods and you fill your shopping cart. No, A whole food diet is actual whole foods, fruits, vegetables, beans. So it's not sugar, it's not oil. So when I say a whole Foods plant-based diet, I mean no sugar, no refined grains, no oil, none of the shit that you're talking about.


That's what a Whole Foods Plus exercise. Yeah. Plus these people eliminated. Well, these things that they were eating before that gave them heart disease, Selten's studies were only dietary based. He did. It was a whole foods plant-based low fat diet. And if you read my chapter on heart disease and, and the Whole Foods diet, you know what, I'd love to have this conversation with you someti other time, but Even diet based, you're still eliminating all these toxic things. Exactly. Right. That's a good thing. So no one has proven that a whole Foods plant-based diet along with those toxic things, like if you, if you had all of the good foods that we know, whether it's, you know, animal foods, mollusks, all, all those different things, if, if we could just all come to an agreement, there's things that people eat that, that we've been eating particularly over the last few decades in this country that are just bad for you.


Yeah, we agree. The problem is we get into these ideological discussions of meat versus plants. And this is where things people tend to sort of gravitate for towards one side or the other and ignore all the different, different aspects of this conversation. Like what we're talking about here with eliminating sugar exercise. If you said a whole foods plant-based diet plus adding exercise and eliminating foods that we know to be toxic is better for you. There's not a single person who's gonna argue that. The problem is, everybody says it's a whole food plant-based diet that this is what's doing the good. But it's, I think what's doing the good is a lot of things. So exercise, eliminating toxic foods like sugar and all those vegetable oils and all Bullshit, well, whole Foods diet eliminates those things.


So that's redundant. You're, if it's a Whole Foods diet, it's not gonna have sugar refined grains or oil in it cuz those aren't whole foods. Understood. But the problem is, But what I do want, I'm gonna put those People, were taking those, those consuming those bad things before I, I want, I wanna put this challenge to you. I want you to just, cuz I think call with Selten's work on heart disease is worth looking at for you because he didn't do anything but diet. So he didn't have exercise in it. His program, he didn't have stress reduction, he didn't have meditation or anything else in there. He just had diet and it was a whole foods plant-based low fat diet. He did reverse heart disease. It's so he's But clearly eliminated all those other aspects Are, it's all whole foods plant-based diet.


So no toxins cuz those aren't whole foods. Right. So let's see, Let me, the thing that's the convenient, that's the thing that's conveniently left out. You can say Whole Foods plant-based diet, but it's not just that it's eliminating toxic food. Yes. It's not just eating good food. So what we need to do, what you need to do or you need to come up with some evidence or somebody needs to, that you can throw in my face is a whole foods meat based diet has with eliminates all these toxins will also reverse heart disease. Right. If you can do that, then I'll, I we remember how we talked about beliefs earlier that they're just a pseudo close. You produce that evidence. And I'll take off the pseudo close cuz I, I'm actually about being intellectually having intellectual integrity.


I've come to my conclusions based on my own dispassionate study. So if you produce the evidence, I'll probably change my mind. What do you think people are doing? I'm gonna get wrong. What do you think people are doing wrong when they're eating a vegan diet and they have all these health problems. They're eating a junk food, vegan diet. They're not eating a whole foods vegan diet. They're eating junk food. That's a, they're eating all these toxic foods that we're talking about. That's, But that's not everybody. Chris Hemsworth was eating like he was having vegan, he was having like plant-based shakes in the morning and eating whole foods and he started developing all these kidney stones and had a lot of problem with oxalates. I have no idea if he's having a lot of problem oxalates, chances are he was eating a lot of, a huge amount of green, green Leafy vegetables.


Sure. That's it. Yeah. Those and eating in two large quantities has oxalates and it could, could cause problems in your kidneys. So all I know is that I've been doing This today. Wasn't Chris Hemsworth, it was Liam, right? Her brother. The other which, which one's? Thor? Thor's Chris. Yeah, it's the other one. Liam. Which one's Thor? I love it. You gotta go that way. So, But people, What we, Joe, what we agree on, let's go back to what we agree on. Okay. What we agree on is we should be not eating all this crap. Yes. Hundred Percent. We agree on that hundred percent. And I think we agree that we should eat lots of fruits and vegetables. Yes, yes, yes. Sure. Then we agree on 90% of it.


Then it's the question of how much animal foods are good for us. And that's where we're, that's where we may differ, but probably we're not even that far apart there cuz I'm saying you can eat some animal foods and have a really healthy, healthy diet and lifestyle. It's a question of how much, and at some certain point I believe that the, the, the saturated fats, the cholesterol from the animal foods will begin to clog up your arteries. And it's not that they cause cancer, but they can be, I believe cancer promoters, at Least, you know, there has also been proven there's a big issue with eating cholesterol along with comp simple carbohydrates and things like, I'm, I'm with you on the processed foods since we agree on the simple carbohydrates.


We don't, we don't have to argue about that anymore. You and I, we are simpatico we sync up on that. Cut the sugar out. Cut the cut. The what about oil? How do you feel about that one? Well, I'm not a big fan of vegetable oils. Good. Yeah. Is there any other kind of oil? Yeah, I mean, you could have animal-based oils. I mean, you could, I I actually cook and beef towel. Oh, you mean like booth beef towel and butter? Yeah. I was thinking those weren't oils, but they're fat for sure. Yeah. Well, beef towel renders down into oil. Right. It's, I think that there's a lot of people consuming a lot of processed shit. And I think this is where we absolutely meet in the middle, whether it's vegetable processed shit. Like I have a friend who's vegan who eats all kinds of wacky vegan delights, all these little treats and all this.


I'm like, read this fucking ingredients. What's garbage? Preservatives and nonsense. And, but it's vegan so it's, it's ideologically acceptable. Right. You know, things fall into these, they fall into these little groups like this, this, this aligns with my religion. So I'm gonna eat this. There are Plenty on the, on the paleo keto, there's lots of little groups on the animal food side too. Sure. So everybody, it's almost like diet. In fact, this might be a more interesting discussion than you and I batting each other on about this one. It's interesting to me how many sort of little cults there are in food now there are all these little nutritional food cults and it's, it's, and everybody thinks they're right.


It's almost like a religion. Well, because diet is religion. You're Eating one way and you hope you're right. And if you, you know, the problem with eating right, is that if you're eating something and it's good for you, it takes a while before you feel it. You're not sure. And then also there's a mind fuck going on. You know, a lot of people that get into a certain diet, whether it's keto or other, I tried keto for a while. There's, there's certain things that you do where you start mind-fuck yourself, that you're on the right path. And I, I do feel better. I feel better. But you know, there's people that do that with faith healing. You know, it's hard for people to decide what makes them feel better. There's holistic fake medicines that people like.


What is that stuff called? What are those homeopathic, homeopathic medicines that they're fucking sugar pills. There's literally nothing to them. And yet people take 'em. They, they claim they feel better. Chiropractors. Oh, I feel better. I feel better. Well, I do see a chiropractor and I do feel better. Do You know where, how chiropractors are invented? It doesn't matter. A magnetic healer who came up with it in a seance in the 18 hundreds came up with this idea that by adjusting people's spines, you're gonna fix all these illnesses. And so do you know that when you go to a chiropractor, you Know where doctors came from? They used to bleed people, But they don't anymore. You know that right? Do you know the chiropractors doctors? Like when you go to a doctor of chiropractic, they, how much time do you think they spent in medical school?


Well, they didn't go to medical school. They go to zero zero medical school. How Many, how many nutrition classes did doctors take in medical school? They don't take much. About eight hours. Not, but that's why you go to a nutritionist and not a standard American doctor. But when you go to a chiropractor, they call themselves a doctor Or they're a doctor of chiropractic. Right. And it was invented by a magnetic healer who is killed by his son. His son ran him over in a car. His son was a conman. And that's the guy who went up spreading this whole religion of chiropractic medicine. I don't adjusting babies and shit. I don't That it's, I don't think it's religion. But clearly you don't go to chiropractors. I've been, I do. I've had, I've had good, I had saw chiropractor today, in fact. Yeah, it feels good. Right? Crack, crack, pop, pop.


It feels like something, but it's, this feels good too. I just did that with my knuckles. I, I chiropractor, my knuckles. I can't do that anymore. Can't They just did it. Oh, I did. There you Go. Wow. How about that? Wow. Amazing. But you, my point is that there's no evidence that that is doing anything to you physically. If you go to a doctor, okay. And you have a serious issue, like you've got a broken arm and they have to put, you know, plates in it and screw it in place and put it in a cast, there's real evidence that that works. They've shown it. They've healed people. Yeah. So doctors can are pretty good at healing bones. They're not too good with cancer. They're not too good with heart disease.


They're a lot better with cancer than they've ever been, ever in history. They're, they're, they're closing in on fixing that. And in fact, there was an article just today that there was, I think it's in Israel, they figured out a way to have genes that actively go after, like surgically go after cancer. There was an article in, was it Scientific American? There was an article today about a fantastic breakthrough in cancer therapy. Crispr. Crispr yes. They're using CRISPR to do this. And they figured out a way to actively target the way they described it was surgical revolutionary.


Yeah. CRISPR based genome editing system treatment destroys cancer cells breakthrough may increase life expectancy in brain and ovarian cancer. See? So you can't say that doctors are not good at treating cancer because they're constantly working on it. They're they're Making, But they're breakthroughs like this all the time. That's Just a theoretical breakthrough. And I hope it's correct, but hey Joe, here's the reality. Re hold on. That's not theoretical. Researchers have demonstrated that CRISPR ca nine system is very effective in treating metastatic cancers a significant step on the way f to finding a cure for cancer. The researchers developed a novel lipid, nanoparticle based delivery system that specifically targets cancer cells and destroys them by b genetic manipulation.


They, they, they practice this on animals. This is not like a theory, this is something they're actually doing with crispr. I'm, I'm all for it, but I haven't seen it yet. Mind mind you, you Should look around. Mind you. I, well, here's the reality. The reality is, is that we spend 80% of our healthcare dollars on lifestyle dietary diseases. The doctors can't help us with it all. You can say there's a cure for cancer. The best way is to have a strong immune system because we get cancer all the time and our immune system just deals with it. Yeah. But there's babies that get cancer, you know, like cancer is a genetic issue. Sometimes people have a a, a systemic, like their, their, their body has a vulnerability to cancers.


And the reality is you Can't say to that baby, suck it up and have a better diet. All All biological carbon-based lifeforms have a propensity or animals have a propensity to cancer. Right. But that's why it's fascinating when doctors and researchers can come up with treatments, novel treatments like this. So to say that doctors and chiropractors are on the same tier. I didn't say that, but you, that's the example you used when I was talking about how chiropractors are full of shit. I don't, I don't have the same, I don't hold doctors in the same high esteem that you do. I've worked with lots of doctors and they generally don't know what they're talking about. Oh. Oh Man.


How can you say that? There's so many doctors that are experts in their field that have helped People. You know, you were talking about the sugar industry bribing somebody, the pharmaceutical industry bribes doctors every single year. All their continuing education are these junkets to golf, golf resorts. And where they get continuing education about the new wonders of these drugs that, except for vaccinations and antibiotics, most of these drugs don't cure anything. They just deal with symptoms. Well, I agree with you on that, and I agree with you that there is a gigantic problem with pharmaceutical industries having influence over doctors. My wife's mom's a nurse and she would tell us stories about how these pharmaceutical companies would take everybody out to dinner in these fancy restaurants and pay for everything.


And they weren't bribing you, but they kind of were That Is kind of a bribe. It's kind of a bribe. And they would let you know, like, Hey, you know, if someone comes in and they got this problem, we got this. And Reciprocity. I do you a favor. Yeah, you do me a favor. Yeah. It's sneaky. And they sneaky, they'd send you on trips and you know, you'd go on these conferences that these pharmaceutical companies would put together. No, I agree with you. There's, there's certainly some influence that the pharmaceutical companies have over doctors and certainly there's, there's an unpleasant exchange that goes on between them. But to say that doctors aren't doing any good is crazy. I didn't say they aren't doing any good. You're, I I I didn't say, What did you say?


How'd you say it? I Ju I just said I think You don't have a lot of faith in them. Yeah, I I mean for if you have, look doctors, if you have first aid, if I, if I have cuts and I need stitches, I want to, I want to Orthopedic surgeon, if you have a blown knee, Absolutely. Hey, I've had both of my hips resurfaced. Oh, you have? And I found the best surgeon in America, I think to do, to do that. So how'd You blow out your hips? You know, we don't really know. Probably the doctor thought I played competitive basketball in high school, college and city league for years. And he thinks that I had a, I was really small when I, when I got to high school, I was only five feet tall.


And then I grew about a foot in a couple of years. And he says that there's a disease that when you're growing that rapidly, and if you have a lot of contact in the hip area, like you might get from martial arts Oh. Or, or you might get from football or basketball from jumping and all that lateral movement that my hips were not quite in the socket. So my cartilage wore out prematurely and I was bone on bone when I got the surgeries done. But you know what a miracle. I don't have any real pain in my hips for occasionally, but for the most part I'm, I'm pain free doctors Yeah. Surgeries just to make clear surgeons. I mean, if you need surgery, you need first aid, like a broken bone.


I think, I think we're on the same page. What you're saying is that doctors over-prescribe medication. Correct. And under prescribed healthy living and diet and doing all the things that we know to be positive Exactly. For the, for the human body. Exactly. No, I, I, I agree with you because I don't get enough training in, I don't get enough training in, in, in healthy living. No, that's a fact. Like I, I had a conversation with the doctor where he is telling me you don't need vitamin supplementation. You just, you know, just eat a good diet. What's a good diet where you're gonna get vitamin D three? Our business model that I'm kicking around investing in would be a business model where you have doctors and you have a whole team. So Joe Rogan goes in there, we do a complete workup of everything about your blood, your total health, and then we begin to customize our ideas to get you to live an extra 10 or 15 years and increase your health span.


How can we optimize Joe Rogan, how can we optimize your health and wellbeing and a team of people that are working with you, studying you, you're paying a monthly fee to get this, it's kind of concierge medicine, but not just dealing with getting a prescription from this doc so you can get your Viagra or whatever from the doctor. It'd be about, about them optimizing your long-term health and wellbeing. I think that could be, I think that is gonna be a big future business model Then you would have to have people actually go out and do things like Mike, you're gonna have to work out. Yes. Well think about it. We have personal trainers, we have executive coaches that corporate leaders frequently get.


Why not have a wellness coach who's with a team of a doctor and wellness coaches who are helping you to optimize your absolute peak performance that you can get. Have You ever thought about implementing something like that for employees at Whole Foods? I have thought about that. It's pretty expensive to do it. Yeah. That would be the problem. Right. One thing we do at Whole Foods though, if you work for the company, we gave you a 20% discount for in being a team member. But then we measure your four biometrics. If you're interested to get a higher discount, you're, if you don't smoke, if you smoke, you're, if you, we detect nicotine in your blood, then you're out. You can't, we don't. And then it's about your body mass index and a man as big and it's you, we do a height to waist ratio so that you wouldn't be penalized for being Yeah, I'm obese By a BMI measurement, but, but not by a height to rate waist ratio.


So we do it both ways and give you the benefit of whichever one you get the best score on. Why don't just do their body fat so you know that It's just muscle hard, hard, a little harder to measure because the cost of doing the tests. The Cas Yeah. That's, It's not that big a deal. And they also, they've things now that electro magnet or whatever it is Yeah. Scales hold onto these handles and it shoots Well maybe we need to examine how we could do that more effectively. Yeah. But we also do blood pressure and cholesterol and then, and then based on how you score on those, you can get up to a 30% discount based on your overall health. So we create an incentive for our people to be out Here. Oh, that's great. So the people that shop at Whole Foods that work there get a giant discount.


They get Already get a, they already get a giant discount at 20%. They can get an additional 10% if they're healthy. Yeah. They, they could get, we have four different levels. We call a a bronze, silver, and gold levels. What do you have to do to get gold? What do you have to do? You have to have a, a BMI that's under 24 cholesterol that's either total cholesterol under one 50 or LDL under 80. I think That's a, that's a hot button. Debate. Blood Blood pressure. I, I think, I don't wanna have that debate with you right now. No, it's not me, man. It's a carnivore md. This guy Paul Saladino had this and col And then blood pressure under one 15 under 75, 1 15 under 75.


And what do you get if you hit gold To get gold? Your blood pressure 1 20 80, your cholesterol. No, but what do you get like in for? Oh, for gold you're gonna get a plat bronze, silver, gold plat. Platinum. Platinum, platinum. Platinum's the highest level. You get 30% discount. Oh, That's a, that's a sweet discount. Gold's 27. Oh, okay. Silvers 24 and 22 for bronze. That's nice. So you incentivize people to make healthy choices. Do you give them any sort of a gym membership or something along those lines that would help? Right, That's a good idea. We haven't done that. Yeah. What if, what if you had a thing at Whole Foods where you had a small gym attached to Whole Foods where you offered classes for employees?


Take some of that Jeff Bezos money. Yeah. The problem is in action. The problem is we actually do locate close to gyms and sometimes our stores work out, deals with the gyms to consent people to use the Gyms. Oh, that's great. But having, having a gym onto every store would be expensive. We, we don't even have one in our corporate offices. Although we're thinking about how Do you not have a gym in your corporate office? I think it's the egalitarian culture. Would it be fair for the people at Global support to have a gym when the people in the stores don't have one? Mm, I understand. But We have the same benefits for all our team members, regardless of where they work. Oh really? Yeah. Oh, that's very nice. If you're a cashier at Whole Foods, you've got the same benefits. I do.


What do you do personally in terms of exercise and, and to make sure that you stay healthy? So When I was younger, I played competitive basketball and I was a runner for a long time. And now I'm a long distance backpacker. Ah, you're rucking. Yep. I've I've hiked the Appalachian Trail twice. Have You really? I hiked Jesus Christ Pacific Crest Trail one. How Isn't that like months? The first time I did it, I took a, I took a sabbatical in four and a half months. You took a four and a half month sabbatical. Took walk. Yeah, it was great. It was so fun. That's so crazy. I made a ton of friends. The guys I met on that trail I still go hiking with every year.


Really? In 2000, you, it's kinda like being in the Marines. You have this deep bonding you have with people. Well, you know, you're walking all the way across the continent And Joe, you get so frigging fit. Oh, It imagine I got, even when I got into Maine, I was still getting fitter. But you know what, as soon as you stop hiking 10 hours a day goes away, it goes away pretty quickly. Yeah, yeah. I've traveled with people that work on ranches and you try to keep up with them and like your, you just, your ankles wanna fall off because They're moving all the time. They're constantly doing it. They're, there's, it's, and for them, it's not even a workout. It's a normal part of their everyday life. So their legs are just totally conditioned to be able to hike up those hills and, and, and walk constantly. People don't realize like how difficult hiking is.


It's like, what do you do for exercise? Oh, I go hiking. Like, oh, slacker. Like, hiking is hard, man. It Depends on how, how it could be. If you go for a 30 minute walk around, the neighborhood is not too hard. But the Appalachian trail, that is another level. You know, It's, it's, it's wonderful. I love being out in nature. That's, if you ask me what my f favorite form of recreation is, it's getting out into nature in some form or fashion. I, I love, I love hiking and I love long distance backpacking and I do it ultra light. So I mean, it's like I've got it down to a science. So when you say backpacking, so you're sleeping out there in the wilderness? Oh, I'm camping the whole deal. Yeah, Absolutely. Now there's not a lot of CEOs that are willing to do that.


I, I, I don't know, but remember the other second time I hiked it, I did it in over four years because I couldn't take that much time off. When I retire sometime the next few years, if he's gonna go hiking, I'm gonna go hiking a lot. Be beyond those trails. There's so many people right now that are aspiring CEOs that wanna be some big time baller like you. And they hear this and like, oh, when, when when I retire I'm gonna go walking. They're like, fuck you. Well, you're supposed to be out there bawling. You're supposed to be on a yacht and doing crazy shit. Well, I'm may do some of that too, but not mutually exclusive. I can only, I can't hike 12 months a year. So I like that I can do some of that other stuff too, That they're not mutually exclusive. Now when you do it, do you ultralight camp too?


You bring like a very light Yeah. Tent and Yeah, so like my base weight before food and water is about six and a half pounds. And so that's pretty light. And my tent weighs 12 ounces. My backpack itself weighs about 14 ounces and my sleeping bag's gonna weigh about 20, 21 ounces. And how do you know how much food to bring? And do you I've got that time out, like How far you're walking, you have to plan it out. So, and, and when you're gonna resupply. But in general, I'm gonna consume about pound and a half to two pounds of food a day. And so I have to, and I, I've just, I know how much I need to take each day.


What do you bring? Do you bring bars? Do you bring whole food? Like what do you bring In the first couple days? I'll, I'll definitely take some whole foods like apples, maybe even some snap peas and some Peanut butters and stuff like that. Yeah. I do high Calories. I do, I do a lot of high calorie stuff here. Yeah. I, I do a lot of nut butters, trail mix. I al I also avocados some, you know, whole food, whole grain crackers, things like that. But then once you're a few days in, you kind of can't do that anymore because you're not don't have access to supermarkets. Yeah. I also might take a sandwich out for the first day or some hummus or something like that.


Why Don't you have dudes parachute you healthy foods down? Well what I'll, what I will actually do is, what most people do is they, they mail drops, have somebody mail, drop the food. And what, what I generally do is, is I usually have a car support that I meet up with every once or twice a week and get resupply that one. Oh, okay. That's a good movie. And I have to say, I'd like to spend one, take one day a week off and go into a town, get a massage, eat some town food, which tastes really good after you've been on the trail food for A while. Is it hard to find vegetarian foods when you go to these towns? You Know, it, I would say it used to be when I, when I, I hiked the Appalachian trail the first time in 2002, so it was pretty hard back then.


But there's, there's plant-based foods everywhere now. But if you're exhausted, don't you wanna meatloaf graving? I, I know this will surprise you, but I have, I have lost my taste for it. No, it's not surprising at all when you get used to certain types of diets. Like that's what your body seems to craving. Right? Yeah, no, that's one of the big learnings I have about food in general is we will, like whatever food we eat. So we, I've reeducated my palate. When I was a kid, I ate the standard American diet junk food. Right. I just ate crap. Cocoa puffs for breakfast, sweet rolls, burgers and fries, shakes, you know, the stuff that still most Americans eat. And I didn't eat any, any vegetables at all.


None. Zero, none pickles on a burger. That was it. Wow. And then that's hardcore. Yeah. But then when I, when I began to wake up dietarily and nutritionally, I taught myself to like every type of plant food. I like every kind of plant food because once you expose your pallet to a food about 10 times or so, you'll start to like it. Well I would 100% say that the, the standard American diet's fucking terrible for you. I think that the, it's a, a real problem and access and people are hungry. If you're just driving around, they should have some sort of a vegetarian based fast food that's good for you. How come no one's figured that out yet?


Because there's all these Jack in the box. And So a couple of McDonald's, a couple of points. It's a real problem because statistically now 70% of Americans adults are overweight. And 42 and a half percent of Americans are obese. 42 and half percent. That's crazy. That's crazy. It's almost 50%. That's a crazy number. And it, and by the way, it's getting worse. We have not peaked yet. It could be 50% in another five or six or seven years. It's incredible. So we're ex We're escalating. Yes, We're escalating. This is a, this is a crisis in America. We are eating ourselves to death. And it's mostly the things we agree about. Yeah. Junk.


Yeah. Sugar. Sugar. Garbage. Garbage. Yeah. Sugar. So here's, here's what I believe evolutionary is what, what's happened to humanity? So when we were out foraging, which we did for tens of thousands, not hundreds of thousands of years, when we're hundreds and gatherers or gatherers and hunters, our real problem was getting enough food. That's always been humanity's major problem. And so we've evolved a pallet that craves calorie dense foods. We like food that has a lot of calories in it. It tastes really good and, but we just couldn't get it in nature. Maybe you could occasionally get, you could pull down a, a wild game occasionally you can hunt it, eat it, gorge on it cuz you'd eat as much as you could cuz you couldn't preserve it.


Well it still was kind of lean gamey stuff, right. Because they weren't f they weren't being fated up on corn like the, like the pork and, and chickens and beef that we eat today. Or we get honey for example. We might get a couple hundred bee stings if we could get that delicious honey. But it was just scarce. And so we crave it and that's our problem. That's our genetics are working against us cuz we can eat calorie dense food every single meal every day of our lives. And we just get fatter and fatter and fatter. And that's our, that's our existential dilemma that not just Americans, the whole world.


Yeah. It's Crazy cause we've exported the American diet across the world. Somebody said this to me once and it really resonated like that. This is the only time ever where poor people are Fat. Exactly. There's never been a time in history where you could be poor and fat. It used To be the rich people were fat and the poor people get the traditional diet. Yeah. And they were not getting enough calories. So they were thin. It's almost reversed itself today. A lot of them were richer people. They hire personal trainers, they've learned more about food. They eat whole foods, whether it be plant-based or meats or both. And they just take care, better care of themselves. It's such a catch 22 for folks too, because when you're tired and you're exhausted, and a lot of times when people have poor nutrition, they're tired and they're exhausted.


It's very difficult to manage your, your appetite. Like when I'm tired, I have to stay the fuck outta the kitchen that's with me. Like last night I was tired. I worked out pretty hard and I'm a glutton, I have a real problem. I eat way too much. I just sit down, I'll gorge myself and, and I'm like, stop, stop. When I keep eating, especially pasta, I have a giant problem with pasta. I will just get fat as fuck. If I can eat all the pasta I want. I don't, I I just can't stop myself. Like if I have a big bowl of spaghetti, I just keep shoving it in my face. Even after I'm full. If I eat meat, I will stop when I'm full. Like it's, it's, it's the, the satiety, whatever it is, you know, the, the whatever causes you to be satisfied by consuming it.


Sure. I'm good. But fucking pasta. I will just keep going. So, So if you're eating typical white pasta, that's a calorie, very calorie dense food doesn't have any fiber in it. I think part of what creates satiety is fiber. So, and when you're eating lots of fruits, vegetables, then Why does steak make you so satisfied? That's because of the, the the, the fat also creates satiety. If, if we don't eat it too fast. So we, we get, it's like this fat sends a signal to our systems to say, wow, that's, that's a big load I've got in there.


So fat does a similar type thing. Fiber does it though, without the calorie load. So I eat, I eat a, I eat a lot, I also eat a lot of food, but I've just, I'm just eating a lot of fiber. I bet if you and I sat down, you'd be astonished at how much I eat. When you think a lot, what you think of it as a lot. I eat a stupid amount of food, man. Well, you're, you're, you're working it off somehow or another, Somehow barely. I exercise sometimes just to keep from getting too fat. But my problem, my, my number one problem is pasta. There is something about that food in particular. Pasta with tomato sauce. I can just eat it until I explode.


You need to keep that outta your house then. Yeah, I should, but I don't, I That's also a problem. I shop when I'm hungry. Yeah. That's not good, huh? You, You are, you are, you are just the kind of customer Whole foods likes. Yeah. I walked down that cookie aisle. You guys have some awesome vegan cookies by The way. This is why you're, you, you see that this, you're tempted by these foods that are actually really unhealthy for you. Yeah, I think, I think this, this is good because we all are. Yeah. We are tempted. We're tempted by these calorie dense foods. But once you're aware that calorie density isn't our friend, then we can start making different choices. You guys have these vegan cookies. Who makes these goddamn cookies?


It's like auntie something's. They're coming a brown paper bag. Uncle Eddie's Uncle Eddie's vegan cookies. No, you got, I think it's an Auntie, well maybe I'm Wrong. There is an Uncle Eddie vegan chip. Is it Uncle Eddie? And A brown bag Uncle Eddie. Can I get, maybe it is. Uncle Eddie's there. It's chop. That's it. Those those, there's a peanut butter chocolate chip one. That is why didn't I think it was auntie? Because I assume that's a woman because they say so good. I assume it's like someone's aunt cooking It. So, so you'll like this. The only time I really eat that food is when I'm going on a long distance hike and trying to get enough calories is a problem cuz I'm hiking 10, 12 hours a day and I'm burning 5,000 calories and I've gotta, I gotta get more calories than me.


My, my wife says, John, you should admit to the world that the really, the only reason you like to go backpacking is because it gives you the excuse that you crave to eat crappy food. That's Not crappy. They're delicious. They're just not something you should eat all the time. They're just not healthy. Find the peanut butter chocolate chip ones. Those are the jam. I, I eat those with whole milk. Big glass of milk and dunk those suckers in there. I know you don't fuck with milk, but I hate to tell you this, but you know, when I get, when I need a snack like that, I just eat an apple. Oh, how boring. Oh, Apples are, apples are so good. I love Apples. Listen, I'm just joking. I eat apples before I work out. It's my favorite pre-workout food because I work out generally early in the morning.


And if I'm tired and I'm like, God, I need something, I need something, I almost always go with an apple. That's it right there. Look at that. Those are the ones. And if you're a vegan, you could partake, you won't have the milk. You, you could drink it with some bullshit almond milk. What is that crazy cursor you doing there? I, I just zoomed in instead of taking the Oh, I see. The way it seems in there. Look how good that is. Those are so good. Those are, those are very good. And but with Joe, that's, that's your enemy. It is, it is my enemy. Uncle Eddie is not your friend. Well, I don't have it a lot, but I, I do if I'm hungry. She said you come home and I start devouring pasta and then I Yeah. Pasta. I don't, I have that stuff once, maybe twice a year.


I'll, I'll eat a bag of those. Like a whole bag. That's the problem. What Else are you putting on your, what else you putting on your pasta? Just garlic and tomato sauce. That's really what I like. Are you using like a whole grain pasta? You should use a whole grain pasta. No, No, no, no. It's, I'm eating what's bad for me. I'm not itching What I'm eating pasta. I generally buy, what is it? Double zero pasta from Italy. I try to buy, I order it from Amazon. Is that Italian your background? Yes. So you could got that. You got that excuse. You got the genetic excuse. Yeah. I don't have the desire to cook lasagna. And I'm very fortunate that I don't have that desire. Cause every now and then my wife will make lasagna.


And I, if I come home, like, especially if it's late at night and I've just done standup and I, I find lasagna in the fridge that lasagna doesn't have a fucking chance it's going down. But I know it's bad for me, you know. I know. But those, you know, carbohydrates in large, just large quantities like that I know Is bad for Me. You probably won't want to do this. But my wife and I, we eat, we eat a brown rice pasta. Oh, oh Christ tastes really good. And, and then homemade delicious pasta sauce. A lot of garlic and onions and mushrooms. And then we'll add that Sounds good.


We'll add veggies on top of the pasta and then we'll drown it in the sauce. Mmm. It's really delicious. It's not that many calories. That doesn't sound too bad. I actually like hemp pasta. I've been eating a lot of hemp past. I've never, I've never had he pasta. It's very good. Really? Yeah, it's guilt-free. Yeah. So it doesn't doesn't feel real nearly as bad for you. But it's something I like about knowing that it's bad for him. Is it really hemp pasta? It's just white pasta has a little bit of hemp seed in it. No, it's hemp. It's green. It's like a green pasta. Really? Yeah. Yeah. There's a, a few different brands that I purchased. I wish I could remember the name, but I do not have it offhand. But again, I buy that on Amazon. I love, I love hemp seeds, so I might Try that. Oh, I love hemp seeds. I love hemp protein.


Hemp protein powders. Fantastic. I use, I use hemp seeds in my smoothies. Mm. It's good stuff. Yeah. And it's easy to digest and it's, it's got all the amino acids. It's one of the best, most complete proteins in terms of plants. I know. Yeah. That's Why it's, that's why I Take, it's super easy for your body to, to digest. There's something about hemp protein. Like if I know I have to work out in an hour, I hesitate with some forms of protein. Like for specifically whey like whey my body doesn't digest that well tastes pretty good. Like you can get a lot of like delicious whey protein supplements like powders and stuff. But it's a gas factory. It's, it's Rumbling in your stomach. May not agree with your particular bacteria.


You know, cause the gas and all that stuff. You know, we, we have a microbiome that's increasingly become aware how important that is for our health. Yeah. Like people that say they can't digest beans, I say well it's cuz you've gotta feed the bacteria that digest beans. So if you always avoid beans, you're not growing the bacteria to digest the beans. But Aren't there some people that just have a genetic propensity to have a Issue? There's a, I'm sure there's a genetic propensity for pretty much everything. So there's, that's a definite yes. I, cause I have People that just can't fuck with beans at All. Well, but what I, if I was their coach, I would say, you know what, beans are really healthy foods. So what we're gonna do is we're gonna first start with lentils. We're gonna just, we're gonna have you eat a couple tablespoons of lentils today.


And then we're gonna, what'll happen over time is you feed the microbiome and you'll get the type of bacteria that we'll be able to digest legumes. And for example, I haven't had meat so long that if I probably tried to eat some meat, I'd probably wouldn't be able to digest it. You'd probably be an ecstasy, a cookie of a elk steak. I I might have enjoyed eating it, but my digestive system wouldn't be able to handle it cuz I don't have the bacteria. I'd have to read, grow the bacteria to digest. I wonder, it'd be interesting to watch. You might love it so much. You might go, what was I, I was talking all kinds of crazy shit about not eating meat. God, it's so good. You know, I don't, I I know that you're, I I'm way past that.


I just don't have that craving any longer. I believe you. I've got it though. I got it for both of us. You got it. And you got a pasta craving too. That's the one I need to get rid of. But here's the thing, Joe, I think you're just a guy that's, you know, you're just living a big life. You know, you're just, you're a big man. You're living a big life. You have a lot of passion. You have a passion for life. You have, you have That's A nice way of saying a glutton, Well gluttons have a passion for life. Yes. But you, if you were just a glutton Yeah. And you weren't doing all these other amazing things, then that would be a true accusation. But you're sort of a glutton for life. I am a glutton for life, but I, if there's one part of my life, my personality that I'm embarrassed by, it's my consumption of food that I shouldn't be eating.


Because when I start eat, like particularly pasta, it's just I know I'm not supposed to do it. It's the one thing that I know I'm not supposed to do and I just keep Doing it. Well, you have to make a deal with your wife not to have it in the house. There's no deals I'm gonna buy it. But, but you, you so you know you're going to do things you don't want to do. And you have it around anyway. Well, While I'm enjoying it, that's the problem. Is the mouth pleasure. During the 15 minutes or so that I'm sitting down eating that bowl, probably not even 15, probably like five. I'm eating a big bowl of spaghetti. The mouth pleasure that I get. I'm gonna, I'm gonna, there's times I'm just gonna accept it And that's worth it to you.


The Crazy thing is I will feel like shit for a full day afterwards. Yeah. Like I'm trading five minutes of mouth pleasure for a full day of feeling like shit. You Know, I, I feel that way about, about good red wine. Ah, me too. So, so what I've learned partly from my, you know, your, the watches that measure my sleep is whenever I consume any alcohol, I don't sleep as long and I don't sleep as deep. Yeah. And I see it now. I see the statistics. Me too. And I, and when I don't drink, I sleep longer and deeper. What do you use? What kind of watch you got there? Oh, This, this is a, i I just switched over to this watch. This is a, it's fancy chora. It's really a 3, 3 50.


It's a choros apex. Those Are really good. I've, I've heard of those. Well, I love about, this is battery time since I'm a long distance backpacker. This one, this one goes without recharging for about 30 days. Whoa. How's it do that? It's just got the most amazing battery and if I want to use it full GPS mode to to to on my hiking and whatnot, I can get like four full days without having to charge That. That's incredible. It is. A lot of those are good for a day. You go To gps, which, which is, which is why I switched from the Apple watch to this one because, because it Does this and does it monitor your heart rate? Yeah. You sleep all that jazz. Everything, Everything the Apple watch does. Yeah. I use a whoop strap. I use this thing which is good for about five days and I do notice that when I drink my recovery's shit, But I'm telling this story because to me the, the real pleasure of something like red wine is when it's convivial when you're doing with friends and you're gonna have a long conversation and you're gonna laugh and you're gonna joke and you're gonna tell stories and you're just gonna have a lot of fun.


For me, red wine enhances that conviviality and I'm willing to make the trade off occasionally. I'm not sleeping as Well. How occasional, You know, about every 12 hours or so? No, I, I'd say, I'd say on average I probably average probably a glass a week. But I tend to bundle that up. So it might be, I might not have anything for three weeks and then I might have three glasses of wine over an evening. Yeah. My problem is once I have one glass, you're gone. Yeah. Well that's the problem, right? You then your inhibitions are lowered and you're like, look, I'm home. I'm not going anywhere. Look, look, Look what I do in order to not do that is I have my glass and then I don't let 'em fill it up when it's only halfway.


Right. If you're at a restaurant or whatever, cuz then you, it's sneaky then you've, you lose track of how much you're actually drinking. You're having a good time. So you just keep drinking. So I make a decision, okay, I'm gonna have fun tonight, but I'm gonna have two glasses or one glass, two glasses or three glasses. Never more than that cuz I'm gonna, it's just not worth the pain Then. Yeah, that's the problem is you have that third glass, you're kind of lit After the third glass. There'll be no stopping Dennis's four and five and you're doing shots. Exactly. Dancing On the table And having one fun hell of a hella fun time, but feeling terrible the next day. Do You ever supplement with glutathione afterwards? I never have tried that During Yeah, it helps a lot with your, your liver, your liver's ability to process alcohol makes a big impact.


Is that right? Yeah. A doctor told me about it, if you believe it or not, Some doctors know some things, some Doc. Well this doctor's very good. Shout out to Dr. Gordon. That's just a, a glutathione as a amino acid. Yes. Yeah. It, it aids in your body's ability to process alcohol. Does this give you the excuse you need to drink more alcohol? No, but it does help. It doesn't really, it's not a good enough excuse. You're still doing a lot of fucking damage, but Right. But it does help. And another thing that helps with me is if I drink water and I supple up with Electrolytes. Yeah. I do that too. Yeah. Such a big, the problem is then you, you're gonna get up to, In the morning, you're just gonna pee pee, pee pee. But you gotta deal with that. You know, interesting thing I discovered about you today is that you're a man has these very great passions about things that you were defend these.


Absolutely. You know, we, we had, I, I don't know if you're gonna edit any of this, but we argued probably for 30 minutes about heart reversal with meat and plant-based stuff. And you were, you were so passionate about you gotta cut the crap out. You gotta cut the crap out. And then, and then you start saying, man, I just love pasta. These Uncle Eddie's cookies are so incredible. Right. And it's, it's like I find that fascinating. You are, you're, and it it, but I also like that about you a you're not, you're not a hypocrite. I mean, you're not, you're not, you're not pretentious pre pretending. I'm Not lying. You're Not lying. You're authentic. That's the word I'm looking for. Yeah. You're authentic. You show the real Joe Rogan shows up and I so I like that about you.


Cause I like authentic people. And then you're willing to say, this isn't bad for me, but I choose to do it anyway. In a sense you're doing it consciously then you're making a conscious, conscious trade off. Although you say sometimes you lose control, then you go unconscious. Is that true? Well, not that bad. Look, if I do eat pasta, like legitimately, it's no more than once a week. It's, it's rare. It's very rare that I sit down and eat a, a big, the problem is once I'm eating I'm like, fuck it, we're doing it. And then I go. But the majority of my diet is very healthy. The vast majority of my diet, I eat mostly wild game. So I'm, I, I hunt, so I'm eating elk meat.


I'm eating. Are you getting those pigs? I haven't here. I have in the past I've shot pigs in California, but I've been invited to do it out here in Texas. But unfortunately a lot of people in Texas are not eating them. They're shooting them and then leaving them there, which is, I'm not interested in that, but I am interested in eating them. You you ate what you killed? Yeah. I eat, I used to have chickens when I lived in California. What coyotes ate 'em all. It was a rough, rough, rough couple of days in the house. But then tho those eggs were fantastic. And those are, you know, when you have free range chicken eggs and they have that dark Orange yogurt.


I, I have eggs. I mean, I have chickens. Do you eat the eggs? I Don't. Why not? But I give them away. I should have brought you some today. You Think they're bad for you? Yeah. The honest answer is I did, I stopped eating eggs for a very bizarre reason, which was that when I first became plant-based, the media, we got really interested in it. And I said, well, I do you, are you pure? And I said, no, I, I, I eat eggs from my own chickens. Right? So every time I was talking to the media, they always wanted to ask me about the chickens and the eggs. And I always had to explain it. And I got so sick of explaining it and I said, you know what? I'm just gonna stop eating these damn eggs so I don't ever have to answer this question again. Really? Yeah. Really. I wish I was your friend back then. I would've said, John, fuck those people, eat those eggs.


It's like a zero oh karma situation. You misunderstand. It's, it's not that I, they were scolding me. I just was Oh, I understand. I was bored. Oh, I understand. With the Question. Yeah, I Understand. And so once I just said, no, I don't eat any, I just a hundred percent plant. I Get it. But you can't alter what you're eating because you don't want to talk about it. That seems crazy. Oh, especially chickens and eggs. It's such a free ride. It wasn't like you feed them, they're healthy, they, you eat their eggs, they're good for you. We Give 'em away. Our friends love us. Well that's nice. But you don't, do you really think about frying when them bitches up when no one's around? You know, I, I, I, I did the first couple of years and then I stopped doing it and I haven't had an egg since and I haven't missed it.


Bill Burr is a good buddy of mine's a hilarious comedian. He goes, he goes, you want to get fucking confused? He goes, Google our eggs, good for you. And then just start reading. I know that's worse than this coffee. Good for you. That's One of those things where you could find a hundred articles that say eggs are the greatest food in the world and a hundred articles that say Ed eggs are gonna kill you. And it's like you don't to go through the research. You know why eggs are a paradox? Because eggs have a lot of, they have a lot of good things in them. Yeah. That's why they show up. It's like they're really good for you. They have a lot of nutrients in them, but then they also have things that we don't think of as particularly good. So that's why it's a paradox. That's why you get opposite Status.


Yeah, well you also just get people that think they're a hundred percent good for you and people that think they're a hundred percent bad for you. Right. It's like he's just saying like, and it's what we're talking about essentially like the argument of plant-based versus paleo, you know, versus now carnivore, which has been introduced. I had a very compelling conversation with Paul Saladino for three hours where he is talking about the benefits of a nose to tail carnivore diet, eating nose to Taste. Yeah. Eating organs, organ meats, and the importance of organ meat. And that it's like, it's pretty interesting. Like a lot of people that eat that way are very healthy. And then a lot of people that eat vegan are healthy. It's like you could get lost in these conversations and trying to figure out what's right and what's wrong in A lot of ways you have to find out what's right for you.


Yeah. But you have to be kind of objective about it. Meaning you can't just fall into confirmation bias. Because if you do that, it's like, I've seen a lot of people say, you know, it's so confusing. You, you Google or eggs good for you and you get such contradictory information so you know, I'm just gonna eat what I want. Yeah. Then you're doomed. Then you're just gonna eat calorie dense foods that taste good for you and then you're gonna screw yourself up. Get fat. I think having cheat meals is not a bad move. And that's what I basically do when I have big bowls of pasta or I sit down with a bag of cookies. I don't think it's bad to reward yourself, but I think the majority of what you consume should be, it should taste good, but be good for you.


And I think that that's where people need to make their choices correctly. I agree. I see it the same way I I you say a cheat meal, I I think it is just an occasional indulgence. Yeah. Because cuz life is not meant to be purely aesthetic. It's meant to be joyous. Yes. And we're gonna die anyway. So we should, we should have some, some joy in our, in our lives, but we'll have the most happiness and joy in life if we're also healthy. So if we go too far in indulging ourselves, we may be sub optimizing in the long run. Now, when you say you're gonna die anyway, when you see these crisper people and all this crazy genetic manipulation, if they start rolling out some new technology that extends life far into the future, like I've heard that if you can make it to 2050, you're basically gonna live forever.


Yeah. That's Ray. Ray KSAL has been making that singularity, right? Yeah. He's 20, 45. Right? Yeah. Things if we get, since we're extending the lifespan a couple of years, a decade, and it's accelerating, perhaps we'll get to a place where, so the joke there is when I get to be a hundred, I'll be able to live forever as I age, age a hundred. Well, they don't think that though, be able to reverse it. The idea is that whatever is causing aging, what's causing the deterioration and the quality of your life, that that's all disease and that what's a disease that we've accepted, we call it old age, but really what it is, is a slow disease that everyone has.


And if they can get you back to your prime, wherever that would be, imagine if you could be a 25 year old man again, John out there With the wisdom I have. Yes. Living your life out there free and happy. Yeah. So here's the thing, there's another theory. There are a lot of theories, right? A theory that I favor is, is that DNA made a deal a long, long time ago. Or it was a decision was made, maybe not consciously, it evolved this way. It said DNA's immortal, but the holder of the DNA is expendable. And so DNA is immortal.


We're all dna. And the dna, we, we, we send that on the DNA is immortal. The DNA is in every species, every life form has DNA in it. DNA is what's driving it. DNA is the immortal being, and we're not. And we're the DNA's programmed. So they're basically saying, we're gonna reprogram the dna maybe. But every lifeform ages and dies and DNA doesn't. DNA is immortal. And I think that's the deal that was made. Not, I mean that's just what DNA did. It's like, it's hard to keep these life forms alive, but I can keep the, the sex part of me alive and I can, through sex, I can spread it and I DNA will continue to live.


Mm. That's what I thinks going on. I think that's an interesting way to look at it. But I think as you said earlier that the average age that people died at used to be 30 or whatever it was. And now due to our understanding of nutrition and science and medicine, we've extended it all the way to 80 in the western world. Right. I feel like that's how we're gonna look back at people who died at 80, like these poor fucks. They didn't have genetic engineering. They didn't understand that as you get older you have a better understanding and maybe you can achieve enlightenment in your lifetime. You could be free of all the bullshit that holds people back. And Yeah, I read a, I read a a great science fiction series.


The first one was spin by Robert Charles Wilson. And, and it's a long story cuz it has three novels based in it. But I'm, the essence for what it relates to what we're talking about is the people. They, we sent some people to Mars and they evolved over time and they came back to the earth and they had developed certain Martian drugs that would extend our lives about another 50 years. And if you took the drugs and they were quickly made illegal. So it was a whole black market for 'em. And so they called it the thirds that they the thirds because they'd had this other third to their life.


Ooh. And the thing is, is that humanity became a lot wiser because as we get older we do tend to get wiser. I'm a lot wiser today at 67 than I was when I was 40 and a lot wiser at 40 than I was at 20. So if my brain doesn't degenerate through Alzheimer's or dementia, it seems reasonable to think I'll be wiser to a hundred than I am at 67. Yeah. And think if we were able to extend that into 120, 130, a lot of these problems that we have wars and all this irrationality would start to disappear because we just become older and wiser as a species. That's What we would hope. Yeah. Or you have Donald Trump, he's 74 years old, he's not a young man and he doesn't seem, I mean he says the most ridiculous, preposterous shit.


He says shit that you would cringe at saying if you were 30. Right. Well here's some people live longer. Trump May be wiser today at 74 than he was at 30. Ah, that's a good point. So We don't, we'd have to have a comparison. I'm sure he is. I'm sure he is. Yeah. You'd have to compare him to his younger self. That's the thing. Like maybe if you give morons enough time, they eventually will get to a point where they're like 160. They're just start apologizing to everybody Maybe. So like, I'm so sorry. I was so dumb. I didn't know. But you know, here's the thing about politics. You can afford to have half the p half the p people hate you. I can't, I I've, I can't have half my customers, half my team members boycotting whole foods.


Right. Do you know, so I just sent out what, what Whole Foods was doing and the Wall Street Journal put an unfortunate title on that, which is Whole Foods answer to, to healthcare and or to Obamacare, something like that. And so it was just an op-ed piece. It's no big deal. It's just one guy's opinion. Right, right. So we had Hundreds of boycotts around the country of Whole Foods market there. Facebook, there was a signature page and 350,000 people signed it. So they were gonna boycott Whole Foods market. My board of directors got thousands of letters, emails, texts, demanding that I'd be fired.


And then it set this whole tea I was when the tea party was going on. So the tea party then was doing boycotts and it was like, hello everybody. I just wrote an op-ed piece. It was just an opinion piece. It's just my opinion. I I didn't even, I didn't, but they attacked Whole Foods. Yeah. So what I learned, the lesson, my scar on that one is if I go out into the public and I express any kind of political opinion, chances are now it's cancel culture. Back then, they were just, they were trying to cancel me back then actually. Yeah. It just wasn't a culture thing. It wasn't cultural thing. The label. So I've, I've learned to be a little more careful about voicing someday when I retire from Whole Foods, I'm gonna be unleashed When that happens. You gotta come back. Mackey Unpleasant.


Get nutty. I'll help you launch a podcast. Why not? I think that that's very unfortunate, you know, because I think having an opinion about something is, especially when a person is achieved the, a level of success where they've seen a lot of things and they've had to navigate a lot of things. Like that's, that's, those are the people that I want to hear from. Like, why is someone so upset about a person, a just a public person? Your opinion about an issue that we're all dealing with. I Think it's, cuz we, we talked about before, earlier today, that some people identify their beliefs with who they are. So, and you express opinions that differ with their beliefs. They experience it as a personal attack and that's why they get so upset and angry.


You and I don't do that. You could be telling me that I think your plant-based diet is full of shit, John. And it's like, okay, well you're entitled to your opinion and we'll have to compare notes here. But I didn't take it personally. Well that's evidence how we're still having fun. Yeah. As heated as things got. Exactly. Because we aren't our opinions. Yeah. But we don't identify our opinions as, as an essence of who we are, but other people do. So opinions are very frightening and threatening to them politically Too. Especially when politics are involved in, I remember those days of the early days of the Obama administration, people were so upset at him. All those Tea party Ah, yeah. People You think we're gonna have a civil war in this country, Joe. I don't think we are, but it's not outside of the realm of possibility.


It's not good. It's the most polarizing. I think. I thought the Tea party times were tough, but Obama wound up being the successful president and pulled us out of the 2008 crisis. Even though there's a lot of dispute as to whether or not he should have bailed out the, the banks, at the end of the day, things are going pretty well towards the end of his presidency. You know, whether people liked him or didn't like him. This is a different animal. This, this, this situation we have now where Trump is claiming that the, the election has been stolen and there's a large percentage of people that think that's the truth. And then there's other people that are like, you know, they voted for Biden just because they hate Trump. Right. There's a lot of, I mean, there's not a lot of people that are really excited about Biden.


Well in this case, they're either gonna be able to prove the claims or they're not. Yeah. And doesn't look good. There's not much time that there's not much time to prove it. Yeah. So we'll have to see it unfold and how it, how it, what happens. So, I don't know. It's very bizarre. It's a, it's the most bizarre political time of my life, or at least as an adult. Yeah. What's, as we were talking about earlier, it's this, this situation that they talked about in the social dilemma. This same polarizing moment, but it's more accelerated now than I've, I've ever felt it. Do You, do you feel like you're being manipulated by social media? I'm just curious.


No, I don't listen. Yeah, I don't either. Actually. I'm, I'm not on any social media. I'm Sure it's manipulating me in some way though. I'd be naive to say. It doesn't, it's, it's gotta have some sort of an effect on me. You, You have your tweet though, right? Yeah. But I do what I call post and ghost where I post and then I run away. I don't read. So you don't, any Responses, you don't, you don't get caught up in the hub up? No. And I very rarely tweet most of I post things on Instagram and they're not very non-political. It's, most of it is just interesting things. You know what? You need to learn the lessons from your social media and apply it to your pasta eating. I kind of have. Because it sounds like you're very disciplined in the social media realm. Yeah. You don't, you ha it hasn't taken you over.


I'm relatively disciplined with my diet relative. That's why I'm not a fatto, but I could be. I think you're just working your ass off. I I do that too, but I'm te I'm, I have a real weakness. I just don't let it get me most of the time. But when it gets me, oh my God, it's embarrassing. I'm, I'm, I'm gonna go a little deeper on that with you and ask you a question. So is it something that you consciously decide, okay, tonight I'm gonna eat pasta? Or is it like you get a craving and you just do It? Usually I'm, it's a craving. And usually it's when I'm tired. When I'm tired, I have a terrible, like You said, after standup or something like that. I have a late at night if I'm riding. Even if I'm home writing late at night and I'm done at one o'clock in the morning, usually I'm like, just go to bed stupid.


But sometimes I'm like, come on, let's eat. Do the camera. Catch that glint in your eyes though. It's a real glint. Oh, that's, but again, I don't do it enough where I get fat, but I do understand people that do, I really do because it's like a, you know, people think I'm disciplined. I'm, I guess I'm kind of disciplined, kind of. But more than that, I'm scared of not being disciplined. So our work, I I work like there's a weird, like the work gets done, but it's not like there's this like unflappable work ethic that never gets breached. No. It's like I have to, I have to play tricks on myself to get the work done.


Actually. I mean, I, I just think you're a man that has strong passions and those passions carry you into life. And when you're, when you're, when you're full of passion for whatever it is, I think you're probably prodigious in terms of your, what you do. But then you have these other periods of time where you're sort of, you know, you're not caught up in the passions and you're just sort of treading water, so to speak. Am I right? Yeah. It, it's, you know, it's, the problem is that when I decide that I'm gonna do something, I know I'm not supposed to do like, eat too much. I, I don't decide it very often, but when I do, it's like, it, it fucks with your self-esteem. It fu cuz you're like, God, I let myself do that. Like why did I do that?


So, you know how it, you, what you could do that wouldn't mess with your self-esteem is if you just make a conscious decision. I'm gonna do this today. That's What the Rock does. Do you ever go to the rocks? Instagram? No. His cheat days are legendary. So he, he just, he he's conscious about it. He, oh Yeah, he lets the world go. He's not sneaking dude. He'll eat stacks of pancakes. Look, he's an enormous man. He's a big guy. You Ever met him? I have not. He's huge. He's so big. He doesn't seem like a real person. He's like a cartoon character. How tall is he? Oh my god. He's at least six five. Wow. He really, I don't imagine, how tall is he? Like officially six five ish. But he's enormous. Like 300 pounds. All muscle giant.


Just giant human. I know when you're around him you're like, that's not a real person. That's a, that's a superhero. Actually I li I like, I like Joe, I like the rock and movies and stuff. I like his personality. He's a very inspirational person On Schwar. I like Schwarzenegger when he was doing his Terminator stuff in those movies. I thought he was, I thought he was a great comedic actor. Yeah, that Was Really funny. I don't think he intended to be comedic. I just think that kind of became his shtick because he was naturally sort of kind of funny. Well the Rock's Instagram, at least once a week or so. He'll, he'll post like what he's doing. Like he'll have like a tray of sushi that's as big as this table. And I'm not kidding. It's just ridiculous amounts of food he consumes. Well Sushi, you know, you can eat a lot of sushi.


Doesn't have that many calories in it. Well there you go. Let people know Or you can't eat a hundred pounds of it. But I mean He, he'll eat a plate as big as his table. But I mean stacks of pancakes and cookies just, Okay, well those are calorie drinks. Yeah, he goes off. But you go to that guy's social media and he's in the gym every single day. I mean he's, these go off days probably help fuel his motivation and his discipline cuz he gives himself a little mental break. Wow. That You know, also that's fascinating and maybe that he's doing that and that helps cuz he feels a little bit guilty about it perhaps. He says now I have to double my workout to make up for it.


So it's actually using it to push him. I Don't know, you know that guy's so disciplined. I doubt that's the case. I think he really has a healthy attitude. Like, I'm gonna take a day and just go fucking crazy. And then after that's over it's back to the grind. I just think he's on the grind literally every day. Okay. You know. Alright dude, we just talked for like four hours. No Way. Yeah, we did. It's four. It's 4 35. Good. We got a lot of shit you can edit. We're not editing nothing. Conscious capitalism, John Mackey and Conscious Leadership. Leadership is also available. The Whole Foods Diet. Get yourself some books. Thank you brother. I really appreciate it. It was, it was fun talking to you. Thanks.


And when you retire and you ready to talk some shit, come back and we'll have you go off. All thank you John. Appreciate it. Bye everybody. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you to Casper. Give the gift of a better bedroom. Save up to 30% during Casper's Black Friday sale on now@casper.com. Terms and conditions apply. See casper.com/terms for more details. We're also brought to you by Simply Safe in their awesome home security C Nets editors choice for home security and was named the best of 2020 by Forbes and Popular Mechanics.


And you can get 40% off Simply Safe. Plus a free security camera today by visiting simply safe.com/rogan. Hurry this deal expires on Friday. That's simply safe.com/rogan. Simply safe.com/rogan. We're also brought to you by the jeans I'm wearing right now. The shit Rev Town, they got it dialed in, they're better. They're whatever jeans you're wearing now. If you're not wearing Rev Town, rev towns are better. Pick up a pair at rev town.com/rogan. Upgrade your denim game today at rev town.com/rogan. And we're also brought to you by squarespace, squarespace.com/joe.


Go there for a free trial, build yourself a beautiful professional website. Then when you're ready to launch, use the offer code Joe to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. It's the host of my website, joe rogan.com. And it's a place where you can go to build a beautiful website, squarespace.com/joe for the free trial. And then again, use the offer code Joe to save 10% off Your first purchase of a website for donating. Friends, thank you so much. Much love to you all. Bye-bye. And a big kiss offer code Joe to save 10% off your First purchase of a website for donating Friends, thank you so much.


Much love to you all. Bye-bye. And a big kiss.