
Hello friends this episode the podcast brought to you by my favorite underwear me undies I'm wearing them. I don't have to check because I wear them every day. That's all I wear ever since they became a sponsor. I started wearing them. There's only one time when I didn't wear them and that's because my house got evacuated because of the fires and I bought a pair of cotton underwear. They were terrible me undies are made with something called microbe modal and it is the softest stuff that I've ever had on my junk. It's the best it's made from It trees it's three times. softer than cotton and they just nailed it. It's perfect. There is a perfect done to where they're so perfect of give you a 100% satisfaction guarantee with underwear which sounds ridiculous.


Right? Well, they're confident because they got it nailed you have beautiful prints really cool artistic prints and colors everything from Halloween prints to Artistic prints. You can match them boy and girl and boy and boy and girl and girl whatever the fuck you want to do there. Awesome, and you can never run out of undies with the meat on these membership. It's a subscription. It sends new pairs right to your door plus get site-wide savings and exclusive sales me on these has a great offer for listeners this podcast for any first-time purchasers, you get 15% off and free shipping and again a 100% satisfaction guarantee. So to get your 15 percent off your first order free shipping and a 100% satisfaction guarantee go to meet you.


These.com / Rogan, that's me. Undies.com / Rogan. We are also brought to you by athletic greens. Athletic greens is a fantastic supplement a greens super food supplement that I take all the time. It's great for you. They have worked on it over 10 years. This is like the fifty third iteration of this one formula. They've got it nailed. It's an awesome. Green's superfood powder that has just all the nutrients and vitamins that you need to make sure that your diet is balanced what I like about it is it tastes good.


I just dump it into a bottle water shake it up and I'm good. It's awesome. And they're going to give you a hook up there going to give the audience a free vitamin D3 K to dropper with your first purchase of athletic greens. It's pretty much a free year of vitamin D. Which of course is fantastic. For your immune system and you know, you need that in these trying times. So if you're interested in upgrading your daily Health routine and using something that's easy to maintain as a daily habit, I would recommend athletic greens it delivered straight to your door taste great high quality and you'll be hard-pressed to find a more complete formula. So whether you're here in the US, Canada, Australia Europe or the UK head over to athletic greens.com Rogan 20, and that's the claim the special offers.


A you can get this vitamin D3 K to liquid dropper for free with your first purchase. That's up to a year supply of immune boosting vitamin D combined with their Daily Greens. It's some serious nutritional Insurance. Again. Go to athletic greens.com Rogan 22 claim this special offer today. We're also brought to you by Simply Safe Simply. Save has got everything you need to protect your home. With none of the drawbacks of traditional home security. So here's the thing about home security companies most of them trap you with high prices, tricky contracts and shitty customer support.


So while there's a lot of options out there. There's only one no-brainer and that is Simply Safe simply say if it's got an arsenal of sensors and cameras to blanket every room window and door tailored specifically for your home professional monitoring keeps watch day and night ready to send police fire. Or medical professionals if there's an emergency and you can set it up yourself in under an hour just peel and stick the sensors exactly where you need them. No technician required and there's no contract. No pushy sales guys. No hidden fees. No fine print and all this starts at just 15 bucks a month. That's 50 cents a day kids.


How about that? And I'm not the only one to think simply say if is awesome US News and World Report named it the best overall home security of T20 so head to Simply Save.com Rogan. That's SI MPL is a fe Simply Save.com Rogan build there and get a free HD camera for listeners of this podcast that simply saved.com Rogan go there and make sure that they know that we sent you and we're also brought to you by policy genius policy genius saves their home and auto customers an average of 1127. As a year by shopping top-rated insurers in one place if you're thinking 1127 dollars is a weirdly specific amount.


You're right, but they crunched the numbers and that's just what it is. In fact crunching numbers is one of the things that policy genius does best their insurance. Marketplace makes it easy to compare rates from the top home and auto insurance companies to find you the best prices. So here's how it works. All you have to do is head to policy genius.com answer a few. Questions about yourself and your property after that policy genius does all the work. They'll compare your existing policy against others in the marketplace to make sure that you're getting the right coverage at the best possible price if policy genius finds a better rate than what you're currently paying. They'll get you switched for free.


That's the kind of service that is earned policy genius a five star rating across over 1,600 reviews on trustpilot in Google. So if you're a homeowner Head to policy genius.com right now to get started. They've saved their home and auto insurance customers and average of one thousand one hundred and twenty seven dollars a year. Who knows what weirdly specific amount they could save you my guest today. First of all, this is a very first podcast we have done in the new studio and I wanted this gentleman to be the very first person I did in this new studio for a couple reasons one because he is the No podcaster, this is Adam.


Curry. Adam. Curry is a lot of people called different people even myself the Pod father. That is incorrect. The real pot father is Adam Curry. He's the original podcaster. He's one of the people that I don't think he exactly came up with the name. I think he did along with someone else. I forget the exact story either way. He's the shit. He is the host of the No Agenda podcast. He's an awesome guy. He's one of the reasons why I came to Austin and again the very first guest here. At the studio in Texas, please. Welcome the Great and Powerful Madame Curie The Joe Rogan Experience trained by day Joe Rogan podcast by night brother.


If not for you. I would not be here. Wait in both places. Welcome to Tech. Thank you sir, Joe. Thank welcome. You bring tremendous exciting and good energy to our city and to our state. I appreciate that very much, but I'm here in a big reason in a big way because of you. So before we even get started, if you do not know Adam was the very first podcaster ever. He's the real if you if you want to have a patient zero of podcasting, it's you. Yeah, I took this arguably correct. Yeah, I would say it's in arguably correct. Yeah, and then also you talked about how much you loved it here. Yeah, and I've been here 11 years or so without you we would not be here for those two things.


He's right. Well, it's really because after I did your show which I cannot the only thing better than going on The Joe Rogan show is being invited back on the Joe Rogan Chef. It's I mean you did it was incredible for me. You renewed my credentials. Double. Listen, I think you're awesome. I think you wonder most interesting guys on the internet. No bullshit. I really do. Thank you. The other thing that's very interesting is I told you when we were doing the show that time we were kind of getting a little baked. I'm like, this is when my Tourette's shows up you have a mild form. Tourette's and so because I had said that it was like I felt really comfortable just being who I am and not having to worry about I don't want to take right now, you know, Steve minuchin our Secretary of Treasury.


He also has Tourette's also hot wife bam. Well, this is of course one of the superpowers you get when you have tourettes. She's got a hot wife. Yeah, baby. That's what you get is that wears those gloves go all the way down to the Elbow. Hmm I'm saying yeah the ladies like he's kind of weird, but I like that so be You can see him he's testifying before Congress and you can see him like stretching his neck and shit. It's yeah, so it's interesting. But once it's out there than it actually removes all the tension and even on the YouTube comments, you know people like what the fuck is wrong with this guy man. It's like is he backing up his files every five seconds when he's not pleased when he's batting his eyes what exactly is happening?


If someone like 0 physiological thing that they've identified? Yes, it's like Sparks happening in your brain and They're not really sure what it is. It's Julie Tourette syndrome and there's all kinds of stuff. They say can help and what are the things they say help certain herbs always get fucking fishy. There's a lot of ways. Yeah. There's a lot of people say it's you know, it's trauma that the body is held onto that's very possible that that could be it but it started around when I was 7 so it could also be I think possibly vaccine-related. I'm not I'm not saying that I'm anti vaccines, but I knew I know what happened them because my parents took me to the doctor. My dad interesting also had Tourette's vaccines are one of those so can be hereditary.


Is it that vaccines are one of those subjects where people tense up mmm and you're either your the all in or you're not well, you're not allowed to just want safe vaccine not allowed to say I am 100% pro-vaccine but vaccines are in fact some sort of actionable chemical, right? And what is some liquid that you're putting into? Body sure, it's going to have an effect. There's all kinds of stuff in these things happen. Sometimes with people with regular things with Aspirin peanut. Yes, people's bodies react differently to all sorts of different things. That doesn't mean that vaccines haven't saved fucking gun countless lives. Of course, they're amazing that people have figured out vaccines or the boss. I think you have vaccines in a combination of a lot of other things sanitation.


Sure. That's why in New York City the sanitation department still wears kind of uniforms because they were seen as like first line First Responders when people were living in horse shit and trash who just dumping it out their windows in New York. These guys came in like the National Guard and they became this Force. Yeah, that's no doubt about it. If you had to live in like ancient Rome and whether shit would just roll down the street. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean that's how a lot of people got sick in those places right and ancient cultures before they really figured out the sanitation and sandwich in general. Thanks Josh that's giant to prevent diseases vaccines are also free. I mean How many people have been saved by vaccines the overall net gain?


I'm going to want to look at people like a chart. But if you did you'd have to say God look at all the people that were saved look at all the people that are healthy, but you have to say oh, but for some people it fuck them up, you know, I mean there is a vaccine court right? Well, isn't it? I've met Robert Kennedy Jr. In the past. He's a big anti. Well not no no. No, he's Pro safe vac, but he's very Controversial this one of course, of course because he's challenging the conventional wisdom of vaccines. And you know, we have a lot of media influence to to kind of set us up on this path where when I was growing up we didn't have vaccine for the mumps or the measles and I don't think Ruby as a German Measles and we got it and chicken pox and you got that and so the vaccine industry was able to prevent that and some form of herd immunity, but you know the way A we had these outbreaks and people are all freaking out and you know, it just seems like it's an industry that wants to keep this type of safety for people and that's one view of what is good.


I mean, there's all kinds of views what people think about, you know, certain illnesses. You should just get to build up your immunity now, so this it's hard for me to say, I mean, it's not black and white it just and why should it be black and white watch it a bit Yeah. That's the thing is like this room for reasonable. Russian without getting into fist fights and lighten each other's houses on fire, you know, and this is another subject where I think that's the case. I think there's there's room I think what's interesting is Jamie how to make first adjustment. We got a whole new setup. Yeah. Oh, yeah matter of how about an app to Matt Alvarez the fucking king of the world who put this place together. Let me just say this is so badass.


Thanks me when I you sent me a picture and I was like that looks like the interior of an Embraer jet. I mean this is this is crazy. Easy and then the lighting and then and I'm glad my buddy Drew got you hooked up. Yeah, he will shout out to Jude Teague put this fantastic but this together and you know, just all of it is but shout out to young Jamie fucking VIP. Yeah, it's not for him. We said whatever you do, we don't want headphones and he said he came through for us. I really appreciate. Yeah, we had a couple of sandwiches, but no, it doesn't matter. I'm the perfect guest for that. You know, I just said you're the perfect guest for the first year. I just had you in smoke your weed. You have to be the first guest. Yeah. Well, thank you here. And it's it really is an honor and let me tell you man.


I am here so happy for you. And so proud of what you've done and you know to get to someone to put a fucking number on the value you've created with your show. That's that's that's you that because that's just going to freak me out. No, not at all. That's huge you get exactly what you deserve is to have a sip of whiskey and talk right. But what I want to say is you've made it, you know, this is a this is a big move, you know. Going like a television network. This is not Hollywood picking you up. Fuck. This is something completely different. It's another app. It's like an app against another app. This is cool. You know, we see Netflix and Disney and apple plus and Amazon, you know, so there's all these different.


I think that that creates markets and the place right down maybe a high value but place a value on content and people are willing to pay for it. Yes. I'm not against any of that. I think that's very very interesting and a very logical path and I'm glad that it's happening to you. They have a vested interest in the show, which is what other platforms didn't necessarily have like YouTube has always been great to us. I don't have any complaints really about YouTube. I think the real problem with YouTube is managing at scale. I think they're dealing with some ungodly number of videos that are constantly flooding into it, but they didn't really have an interest other than me. They knew that the show is popular, but it's not like they were working together.


You know, they just They just would take some of the ad Revenue but there was no like real. It was just a nice place where I could put it up they can make some money. I can make some money but something like Spotify is a different situation where they're like, let's do this together. We'll be together. So you'll be exclusive to here and we want you to do well instead of having like a non-connected relationship. Well, a lot of people feel like with YouTube, which is again, I think it's because of managing its scale. They can't have a one-on-one relationship. With everybody it's not possible to somebody fucking people have YouTube channel, right? What is the number? I don't know Jamie how many people have YouTube channels? It's got to be a crazy fever billions.


Why not? Why not? Maybe billions? Why not? Maybe not. Yeah. It's the number one video Source in the world right in terms of like watching clips 31 million YouTube channels out there that point I'd only one what 2014 31 million study with interesting. That's it. Well, In our world, this is preposterous. This is what would this shit must be much more than that. I tell you why does that people use there was a period of time during the podcast when I was telling people to do a podcast and they would get mad at me like stop telling everyone to do a pot. It was like dirty. It was like I was I felt like the lowest rung on the Showbiz ladder was Vijay, but no I went and created one lower which was podcaster.


That's what I want. Okay. I was encouraging to many people to Into it. Oh, oh no, people got people like to stop telling everybody. They should have a podcast not anybody have a fucking pot now. Well this this is very important for me because I realized as the Pod father who you know, really help create everything in this whole the mechanisms of it all how it all fits together is very we're losing something out of podcasting but what that does is actually creates this huge opportunity in a vacuum because There's if you don't mind me saying there's other Joe Rogan's waiting to be born.


They're out there. They're alive right now. So they are ready and they need to have the same type of support that you get inside Spotify and you know, you'll see iHeartRadio and Stitcher they're going to announce deals. It's all going to be kind of they have all the exclusive and you have podcast one and there's and so that's where radio is moving mainly by the music. He's who have a kind of bad business model. They have to pay for every time someone listens to a song regardless of whether they could make money on it or not. So moving to longer form content. That doesn't cost more per minute that people consume is is dynamite for them. They only have people paying under you know, there's ways to do that, which is great.


What I need to make sure we do is that we preserve podcasting as a platform for free speech. It may not be easy for the next Joe Rogan was a different values. Or how they speak to get into whatever is the norm inside different podcast apps understand what I'm saying? I do I do understand what you're saying my thought about it every time I told someone to do it was that there's plenty of room. Yeah. Yeah. There's so many fun it infinite room. Yeah infinite this thought process that people have about not wanting someone look if I have an interesting conversation with someone and they're fascinating person. I'll probably say Should do a podcast if they're not doing one load suggested people got that's how my cigar stand like that's how all of us can do it.


If you enjoy fresh air, if you enjoy, you know Radiolab, if you enjoy No, Agenda of you enjoy any podcast like when you want to encourage some new interesting person to try to get involved and maybe take it to a different place. Like that's what happened. My friend Duncan Duncan Trussell from doing other people's podcast and then doing his own his podcast is amazed you guys Did like a 20 hour show? We did a five hour and 20 minutes. I mean I had to spark up like 45 minutes into it. I'm like I gotta get on their level. Now. What the hell is going to ours is to sober up and then by then we were drinking but work. I'm kind of happy. We had a little bit of yes, Jamie down time so we could get what ready for the shout-out to the VIP.


I'm Jamie again. I pull this motherfucker together. This ship was about Tiffany pain tap. Yeah, this ship was about to say, thanks on, right? Hmm But I'm enjoying Austin. So I love it. It's great Stoke City. How do you how many pizzas less people around? It's going to say. Do you know a lot of people here? Yeah, I do. Yeah, because one of the owners of on it, we're right down the street here. So really good friends with Aubrey and cow Kingsbury's here. And then my friend Todd White who's a Jutsu friend of mine from back in LA. And now he has a he's in our so-called wise a fantastic really interesting does like I would call it like What are those?


What are those speakeasies like Speakeasy 1920s ish? Cool, like interesting. This is the art of what is my friend Todd White? It does like click on that one. Like the looks like yeah right there the one yeah looks like people at a party he does that kind of shit. Todd's been my friend cool. Yeah. Brilliant. Brilliant our cocktail lounge E-Type. Yeah, and he's also a black belt in Brazilian jiu-jitsu from my instructor John Jacques Machado. That's him. That's my buddy. Tyler nice and he's he's an austenite now to and he moved here from La. So he was also an influence talking to him because he's just a really super cool. Dude. What I like about you here man, is that you know, Austin's pretty liberal and it's good that you know when you met Energy, we need male energy coming back.


We need to meet in the middle and hug. Yeah, of course all this large the male female model. By the way, I think is there's a reason it should work. You know, there's yeah, it feels like yin and yang it should kind of go together. Yeah. It takes a while is not very easy not very easy to yeah, it took me a couple couple tries, I think around 50 and like oh, yeah. I think I'm kind of figuring it out a little bit. I understand women way more now because I actually have children that are girls so you You see like the idea that a man and a woman is the same things like the idea that a cat a dog. If you said your cat if you threw a ball for your cat and you like go get it mother fucker. What are you doing? Go get it. Yeah, what the fuck man the dog gets it we're so different and when you watch the little girls grow up and what they want to do versus I have friends that have boys like oh my God, here comes the houses fucking War it's chaos to there was hitting things and the terrorists total to an obviously there's Spectrum there's girls that are in the area of course to we have that in common.


I grew up with women two sisters. My mom. I have a daughter I've to stepdaughters just always a lot of women I get along really. Well, I can be great friends with women, but real super male energy, which is what I enjoy about you as sorry. No, I'm it's really it's really is it's nice because I didn't have much of that growing up and you're so kind of open and nice. About it, but he also Jiu-Jitsu and all this fucking shit down. I think about want to learn we got Jim's here. I'm also very lazy. Well, maybe helps maybe maybe do you work out at all? What had been class D really fucking love the spin class looks like fun.


Oh sitting in a dark room. Yeah, would you dancing on the blank is typically a lot of cute girls that used to matter. But now here's I just want the workout I get it. Yeah, but I'd like someone yelling at me. Yeah do this do that. So it's kind of rhythmic and no one sees, you know, no one gives a shit right low down if you don't make it, but at the end you like I feel good. I didn't know didn't hack up a long like no feel good. But I hate going there. It says is it a dangerous move to have all those people doing cardio in a small room? Like how many of them were fartin? I've never now. I'm very sensitive to this and I've no I've but often which I will definitely go to the bathroom before I go to spin class.


We are courteous. Merci Madame Curie. Yeah, but I have this fear, you know I can but I'm the bike like what the hell course that would suck so that the occasional fart in yoga class is one of the funniest things never happened. But oh my god, I've heard it would be horrible. I've heard my friend Eddie Wong when Eddie did for his television show. He farted. We I took him to yoga. He wanted to do a bunch of things. I took him to your Went to the yoga class and he farted that's the pills before. I've yelled fits me. Yeah good time, man. So but no. No, I think it's quite healthy. Actually, the the ventilation is good shoutout to Agoura hot yoga. They can't even open up right now, California.


Oh, yeah. Well, let them I go to yoga studios. It's so ridiculous. I got a ride indoor cycling and they limited the think 11 people or 13. Just we need tests. The White House apparently has some tests that they could find out in 20 minutes if it's yes come in 15 minutes. Yeah. You just have to accept the Banco chip Adam Curry. Thank you for taking us microchip. Well, obviously at this point everybody is basically thinking Come on. Dr. Bill Gates. Just give me the fucking vaccine. Let me the fuck I'll take it and that you know is obviously advantageous for people but I think that Meme about Microsoft Bill Gates owns Microsoft Microsoft can't stop piracy for Windows.


How the fuck are they go from here. Now. I know it's a good meme solid point if you were a comic and you said that that would kill whoever you are mean person that came up with that line. Yeah, I think the it's concerning all this vaccine the mandatory mask the disputes over but I think it's really a sideshow to something much fucking bigger. What's the biggest thing? Well, so I got need a seat buckle. Yeah. Oh definitely. Definitely. What is the what is the one thing that we absolutely lost during the coronavirus? The one thing that went away it was right in front of our face. We all saw it. Well, what the fuck we Told it had to go away or is very dangerous.


What is that? One thing probably your freedom now, that's what I was saying just the ability to started just everyone no natural control mechanism of Freedom money went away cash went away coins went away. Everyone went digital money and we accepted it willingly like, oh we rolled out Willie thought that someone might be juking the system. Well, there's well. Let me continue. Yeah World Health Organization showed Chinese money being sprayed to clean it from coronavirus, which of course we know is preposterous. But you know Chinese money being sprayed. Yeah, like in Shanghai there were spraying money in the bag there was doing memes as well as lots of like money can be dirty there.


Was it everyone went I'm not even fucking argue with you about the fucking money. I'm not going to touch it. That's what everybody said. You can't argue with me about something. I have no knowledge whatsoever of Too big for that. There's no way we can argue. How can we archive know fact exact? I'm not interested in arguments. I know I don't here's another thing that people learn but there's more to this story please go. Okay this I think this is really important because it's happening right now is really cool. Okay, so that went away and so everyone's kind of you know, now we're using ABS right lot of digital these apps. It's all different networks and infrastructure. You're not really, you know venmo actually connects to another Company that then logs into your bank account and axes you there's all these different ways.


It's been kind of gerrymandered and rig together. So venmo doesn't go right to your bank account. It has like a fake. They go through middleware plaid networks the dark lord. Yeah. Now you just got bought by Visa like 5 billion dollars. So it's just just another part of Vine make because Banks traditionally never talk to each other did we won't do whatever we can to maximize our profits. We promise you're gonna ask that you're going to love it when I get there Joe Rogan. We demand social justice. Well, we're sucking green bills out of your veins. So we're waiting for for the stimulus checks, which is now being negotiated. This is you know, people need money that stop the you know, it's being held up and we and we hear this it's about FBI building being built.


It's about giving States money. It's about all these different things and then we also have this post office controversy. So these two things going on shout out to the post office well, Well the post office it appears is an important factor in a new digital dollar which is currently called fed net. And I think it's called fed. Net. So and is basically the involved. Okay post. All right, let's go back. You know nervous you remember Jekyll Island you were talking to you talking about Jacob Williams. So that's me real facts by the weather.


How about that? Quiz on your clout. I get a 23 you were pretty close. So Jekyll Island is where the Federal Reserve was created right in 1910 in 1907. There was a crisis in America. There was a financial crisis and then the bankers JP Morgan and the actual guys, you know, the old you know, we have Chase bank now and that guy who started that bank and Warburg & couple others. They said this is fucked up. We got to be able to control the interest rate so we can control the economy by boom-and-bust basically. Which we've been through all this time, but when they created it, they had to make that the official way to manage America's money and couple years down the line.


They got the Federal Reserve Act which removed our money from the treasury and gave it to the Federal Reserve and that's these bankers and this gave it a cool name to make it sound like it's a part of the government but it's not so they create the money they manage it and the United States borrows it from them. You've heard this before. I'm sure makes sense. You should definitely give them. Of the money that we have Zach Tony it's gonna work about to get a lot easier for them that easier that is a beauty of it poop poor people in hard-working folks so that the the banking for all act is what is on the table right now. That's why the I think believe the stimulus is held up because they want to give people the money into a digital wallet, which everyone who has a social security number right now has a digital dollar.


her wallet attached to that social security number And all you have to do is if you don't have a bank you go to the Post Office you show your social security number your ID and you'll get a debit card and that is basically your entire Bank on that card and the government can put money on which they will do. They will say will do no. No, it's but it gets better Joe it gets better. You want me to blow your mind funny as that? You want me to blow your mind, please? Okay, please please please so because you're a fan of universal basic income. I'm going to tell you how it's going to work. This is come Okay, so And really you want to hear this. Okay. I think it's really happened. Okay, I could be fucking wrong. But yeah, I did. I'm just a VJ and of podcast and I remember when you had crazy hair you're so handsome to lot of work.


You're still handsome, but you're like older guy hands a lot of fucking word. You're the oldest. You have my young. You're beautiful. Oh my God. Anyway continue though. You say that's all the boys Godfather. Yeah. Alright. Thank you for the only guy. I've called Beautiful to his face so that call Rob Lowe, beautiful. If not, I apologize Rob. You're beautiful too. Who else? You're Beautiful Joe Rogan Mike Tyson, you're beautiful. So you remember the cost of like a Toyota truck in the 70s like well, I was three so like $5,000. Okay. So now in 2020 is $50,000 your fucking truck.


Well, those trucks are really valuable. Now those toys from like the nineteen seventies FJ 40s. Those are amazing. There's something about them that like makes you pretend you're Indiana Jones like you're a rugged individualist with their aluminum door. It's like a fucking it's a like a farm. Vehicle like they're the oh, yeah, they're real Punk. They're real crude, but you could buy it for 5 grand. And now you have to have 50 Grand. Yeah, of course back then, you know you made $10,000 a year you were doing. Okay. Now you write a hundred grand to really say I'm doing okay, but let me ask you this. Why is it that if you look at like a Toyota fj40, why is it so attractive to us? Why does it make me feel like I want to get a leather-bound notebook and go to the woods and right things, you know if I'm one of those Choose one of those two is where our roads are in part.


If I'm one of those dudes was like a fluffy flannel shirt. I don't care about cars anymore. I gave up to fj40. Come on. Look at that thing. That is a rugged individualist car. That's a dude who reads a lot of books and doesn't need a lot of attention and how can we not have with no socks has no socks in his pocket. Oh, that guy's got boots on case the fucking grounds on fire. Okay, guys you drives that car. Right there. That's a bad mother fucker knows how to tie good knots. Yeah, that's what that guy is. That's the guy who knows how to fucking drive those things off road. He knows how to activate the lockers. He's a guy who writes he's maybe can play guitar by the firelight, but he doesn't have a girlfriend.


Isn't it? Crazy? Is this your that guy? He's got a fucking there you go. Let's go play Squirrel. Man has a little bit of that in him. Yeah for sure little bit of poser. Yeah, that guy's opposes that shit on his roof. They're dirty. That's a that guy's probably a dancer probably has nothing to do is shooting or driving trucks or hunting they just put that dude in a beautiful car and beat up stand there and look stupid. So when you get your $1,200 digital in your wallet government money, which is yes, it's called the stimulus, right?


This is the digital dollar and you're going to get everyone's going to get this money. If you're feeling the create long think can the government shut down your account. This is totally where it's headed. Of course, of course, of course, but what's interesting about it is do you know that interest rates have gone negative and most of the world which is really upside down. So because the pandemic no, this is this already have this since 2008 the whole financial system broke. I mean because they didn't Embrace Jesus. We're in Texas. Let's make friends. Friends because they did Embrace Jesus. There's a lot of people and by the way a lot also do you have a fucking quite high quality audience man? They started listening to as a unit as well.


But let me tell you and a lot of people who are Christian, you know, and they definitely see this as n times and and you know, it's like is Jared Kushner may be the Antichrist. Let's have relies on what if they're right. He looks like Damien could be member The Omen I want to pitch. Jamie right. Now. I need a picture of Jared Kushner next to Damien from The Omen particularly when someone's are probably already done it. Look at that. Look at that one with Trump where it Trump's out of focus in the middle. Click that Satan. Listen Jared. I'm just joking. I don't believe anything.


I just said who knows. I'm just trying to be funny. Oh my God, someone's already made a connection Jared. I'm sorry. I'll show you a good guy. Your wife's hot. Congratulations and you're very wealthy. I think it's I don't think you get the fair Shake. I don't think anybody in that fucking anybody connected to Trump gets a fair shake, you know, we know one gets a fair Shake no matter what happens on both sides of the aisle who are at each other's throats. If I if I was a conspiracy theorist and I've been in the past I would say if somebody really wanted to destroy America and then control like a dictatorship. How would they go about doing it? I got an idea. It sounds crazy, but I want to release a virus.


Okay. If I'm consist conspiracy therapist, I just analyze the situation. Yes. I think China has a big role in what's happening AS Global globalism does in general it used to be only centered around climate change and green New Deal and there and there's a lot of agendas running right now. So sorry Angel dollar, which I'll explain to you now than I was before this gets misconstrued though - I don't believe what I just said. Here's another possibility that it also Oh don't believe okay. I don't believe either one of them. Another one is maybe there was some sort of a virus that they were examining and doing tests on in the laboratory some Howard escaped.


According to Brett Weinstein who is an actual evolutionary biologist. He believes that's probably that's very possible, but he doesn't commit either way so I don't I don't know but that's not my field of expertise. I don't know that's that's not my field, but I know but I don't want me to be misconstrued of course not that's all that's why I do what I just said I had to have Sheriff I want something I believe I think the whole thing is very it's so scripted like in terms of I shouldn't say that it seems like fiction in such a stark way that if you had an amazing Jack car book about some foreign threat that invaded America and brought a virus that brought the economy to its knees and then gobbled up all the stocks and then kept people in their houses and met people scared and then manipulated and I'm not saying that this any of those you mean pretty much every Disaster Movie we've seen cash 20 years.


It would love to stream in totality as predictive programming. Yeah. Sure. I remember being on mushrooms want sitting on a hillside thinking about the fact that every single civilization besides ours current has collapsed. If you go to ancient Greece and you look around those spectacular structures, those people aren't there anymore man? Yeah, they're not running. And shit know what I think we'll be okay, but then some awareness needs to happen. Yeah, and just back to taking it from a media angle, which I think you and I share the virus where it came from all disputable, whatever the reaction to it if the tests are okay, if the vaccine is a different that all that doesn't matter to me right now what happened was some the first I remember this because the first unprecedented thing that we heard was China was shutting down a city right of 11 million people.


All right, and that was like holy shit that's never happened before I paid attention like God man. That's some bad shit. So we didn't know what was going on. We're all terrified. But what we also saw on Instagram and Tick-Tock and everywhere else was these videos of people dropping dead on the street. Do you remember that? I do what was that weird that go has that ever happened since I believe that it has happened for some people that are poor health some people that get affected by this disease man. I've only the mean News videos of this I have not seen it anywhere else. I believe that that set something in motion some programming that was triggered by authorities such as the World Health Organization Fouch e Burke's who I remember from AIDS and that clean on all of that.


He's a lot of people pissed off about how they handle the AIDS crisis. Well, I would try or how they were handled. Oh, there's they did tests wrong all kinds of shit was wrong. There's Michael Musto in the Village Voice for a scathing article article about her pouch. You just wasted all this fucking money and people have died. It was it was really and found. She was hobnobbing with Elton John and the whole, you know, is that your phone how dare you the Pod father doesn't know how to this way. It's me. Yes, my we could just talk. Okay, let me put it like that. Okay. So I hope you leave all that in there, Jamie. No, I love that. Yeah that no, I like it. That makes it I love the fact. He's a flip phone as well.


Shout out to Arch your fear. Also flip phone Chuckles. Yes. The our is abandoned the flip phone the other day called me and I said is this your flip phone? He was no saint iPhone how motherfuckers call me from an iPhone. Thought it was a flip phone anyway a lot. I just I just I just need to tell you because you my friend no one else. Listens to me Joe why you're so smart. They should all listen, who's not listening. And what are you saying that they're not listen what I'm saying? Is that just look at the evidence in front of you. I think that this is a globalist type of movement. I think a lot of it has been driven by China. They have their hooks in a lot of us in a lot of different areas and it mean politics in education in finance that in fucking every media Hollywood Sports.


They're in everything and I think that if Was a plan I think that it was intended for some other date not all the players in the pieces were in place remember conspiracy therapist analyzing it but it did so I go signal was thrown by them and then we start end and by the way, the New York Times reported a hundred forty thousand Twitter Bots were were targeting Italy with these Chinese shut down videos. And so I think that that had something had something to do with it. How the how the Mechanisms of social media were used to get people to shut down and this seems to be a lot of dishonest people in the medical field left, right?


Whatever. I don't care what the President says just looking at all the different voices out there. You've seen him. Yeah, you know that you see the words get taken off of YouTube. I got questions, you know seems like some valid things are out there. They're told to shut up. Well, there is a problem with stifling debate, right? It says UK problem. Yeah fuck especially when these people Some of them whether you agree or disagree with that all infidelity is caused by demons wasn't that one of the things that lady said, what'd she say? Oh, yeah that dr. Simone the one who Simone. I'm not sure I know which was which she say about alien DNA there was something but she had she's a typical Caribbean type church with all kinds of whacked-out shit.


There's some strange ideas. Yeah. Well Catholic Church Judaism, there's all kinds of weird stuff everywhere. Shouldn't you let those people People talk. Yes, right like you have to shut him down and shouldn't you have a video that response to that that explains? Yeah. Hey. No, this is actually what's going on. The reason why she thinks that is because she doesn't understand blah blah blah or here's what she's saying that's valid because of this that the other the problem is you're either with us or against us and this has been the problem with human beings since the beginning of time we are Our team players. We love a fucking team.


We love being American, you know, if people got happy my old Studio because I had American flag good food good love the new look. Whoo, cuz I'm on Team America, right we get on teams with his team Progressive or team conservative or team rational or Centrist or you know, you don't think the Libertarians are taking it far enough. All that stuff is if it's a there is there. Labels, I don't I think label should be illegal. It's cocaine's illegal label should be illegal as well. You shouldn't there should be no Democratic party. No Republican party. I don't know Green Party Stop.


Stop it Libertarians, and but he just thinks you're mean. I'm just about done with the name unaffiliated unaffiliated. How about it would benefit everybody if you wanted to combat if you really wanted it. Yeah, that's not true. Because then people would feel suppressed and they would Want to get that we don't want to get back at you. They would go more hardcore underground with something like Backwoods. Parties, I believe there is an element in our society that is small but it has interesting powerful positions that hate America. Just I mean, they're not left or right that just have whole different ideas and it's been said this country.


Yeah, is it that they hit America or is that their interest? Like they can they can it's my words Ausable or beneficial for them because it's always for power to try to Do something these ideologies. Look I think you're right. All Americans. I know we were good people but I mean, I don't even like saying that you go people are generally good people sure the vast majority otherwise, we'd all be dead sure because you would go when he when you have until you see of media around you that I live in telling you it's black.


It's white. It's left its right. It's up its down. This is why I encourage podcast and this is why I have to create podcast index dot org to be independent from Apple. Mainly, I think that's a good idea. But however, as a company apples taken the most uniquely neutral approach when it comes to podcast Apple has been an excellent Steward of podcasting and Excellence do or maybe the best because they're not profiting off. Here's the problem and just did kind of Fucked up when I met Steve Jobs 15 years ago and you want me to bless podcasting and iTunes we talked about that last time.


I also gave him my copy of the index that we had built at the time which kind of made Apple the de-facto on-ramp to submitting your podcast because all other apps and everything has been connected and getting their information and their searches from Apple's database. So when Alex Jones was taken off of Apple podcast plop plop, like dominoes all these other apps no longer had the ability to carry that feed because creating your own index is a big fucking pain in the ass and the average independent software developer would rather work on the experience and make categories and feature who he wants to because Apple would feature NPR PBS.


So there's all these experiences that can be built and these app developers can compete with if you don't mind Spotify feel my I'm just I'm just telling you honestly need to have an outside place where now you know, I'm setting plenty of my own money and people donate or not. And I think we can I love that structure. Yeah, I think we're gonna be tool it's who we can retool to a platform of value. I mean have ideas and so, you know, this will be this will be ready like soon. There's always certainly a concern when any company has a relative Monopoly whether it's YouTuber and then how bad they're not bad that they've been great guys, but we just Talk about love you to bits. Yeah changing its scale is almost impossible.


I think people tend to listen to for it. So they tend to lean towards control and minimizing damage. Right? So if you're dealing with 31 million different YouTube channels, and then you have how many different videos each one of them puts out. If you're if you're thrust in this situation, like what do you think the amount of videos every day that goes through YouTube's net is let's guess that hundreds of Millions. 500 hours of minute. Yeah, by the way, YouTube's money never live long enough to watch everything on YouTube 500 hours of minute. Yeah. YouTube's real money comes from all those cat videos and other shit.


That's the long tail. That's where all the real money is. We kept pretty long views, but the but as an elite messaging system the it's all breaking down. That's kind of the problem. Well, the problem is it's not decentralized, right the problem is Is this it's not there's a company that's in control of it rather than it being in control by the people that are using it. This is the problem with all of Silicon Valley is I fucking hate them for this and that's why I have a flip phone. I love your technology. I hate your fucking business model. I think that their situation if I could just for a second think it's on manageable and I think with when they look at their ethics and what they want to do with community and their standards in terms of society, they think Almost unmanageable.


If you allow people to harass people or say terrible words or attack people or say crazy shit about 9/11 or promote some weird things about the Earth being flat and Moon being fake. There's something about them that like they just want to stop it. Stop it stop. It's not true. Stop it. You must step in. Why do you think that is let's just human nature man, but it's an ideology. There's but there's ideology. Why do you think they want to stop it? I think they want to stop it because it doesn't align with what they've accepted as important enough to talk about but the problem with telling people what's important up to talk about is if someone has a crazy idea like came in the earth is hollow and aliens live inside of it.


You have to be able to say well certainly one theory has someone has to be able to come along and say hey this is how we know it's not Hollow and this is how we measure the density of the Earth. This is how we know about the core. This is what we like. The problem is not that these people are influencing other morons. The problem is that there's a massive failure in education. Yeah, you can't suck me into a flat Earth video man. Yeah. Yeah can't I mean I don't spend a whole lot of time in school, but I understand psychology. I understand from point of not trusting people. I know when people are full of shit and when someone is making a video like they're the one who has all the information about the fact that the world is hollow and that there's aliens that live inside of it.


It's an attractive myth it pulls you in you know, but I understand what people are doing. I think all of this does have a benefit I think so too. It's because he theories q and on Baxter's anti-vaxxers. It doesn't really matter. Oh the Wayfarer children being shipped in cabinets the adrenochrome the celebrities eating children and babies and horrible things. All of that. What that does is it is getting people to and this is why I think it needs they I want it to be stopped or people want to be stopped because at least people are looking at other things and consuming things and making decisions and saying, okay, maybe I should question this question that this does have a way of getting people to be more aware and question more things and that in its basis I think is really good.


We got training wheels on probably right now that people have no idea what that we survived tailbones Joe Rogan. Hey that sounds Jamaican dodo ohgod I failed. Irie, man. Yeah, we do. So what is this doing to us? What is what is this? This instant access everywhere doing to us? Well, it certainly having an effect on how we View and what our expectations are of reality. Mmm with all those the way we view reality is totally different. Now the idea of running around without a phone is preposterous. So the idea of not having a navigation system on your car, it's Preposterous. You know, I have one car that doesn't have AC it doesn't have it doesn't have Porsha yeah, the little 911.


Yeah 1993. Yeah, it's Ross. Fuck man. I had 80 84 911 Carrera doesn't have power steering. No. No, and this is the thing that happens when you if you're forced into that situation. We have to drive something like that you go. Oh, I got to pay attention to everything you could you can get into a drone State just file left in one quarter of a mile. I'm Bridge Road you like Bridge Road car and returns left, right? He just yeah you gonna do it. Zombie, I mean well, so that's part of my not having a smartphone with me is not because of I mean we're being tracked as all kinds of ways what it's more about. Wait a minute. You think we're being tracked?


Yeah, Russia or China or maybe our own commercial companies. They can sell us whoever they want the US government the US government doesn't have to spy on you. Just go to Google or ten other companies and by your location data is the problem that we gave up the commodity of data. We gave it a we just need to be responsible and create less data and be smarter about it. So I don't want it first. I don't want to be fucking no I got enough problems in my life. Don't be notified all the time when I'm when I'm moving around. But could that have been stopped had we had a time machine and you could understand what data would be in 2020 versus in nine. Yeah. Yeah. Could we have gone back and wait a minute wait a minute. Stop data is a massive commodity that's worth billions and billions of dollars and we are treating it like it's not important.


We're treating it like the content is the most important thing in the internet, but clearly the thing that generates the most money for like Google and Facebook and everybody else is it's not that right. It's it's For sure, it's the data. It's finding out where people live what they buy what their interests are. What books I got. I love you. Yes, how much money do you have? What you do online shopping do use Visa why certain different ways Silicon Valley is competing with the US with the Federal Reserve to be your bank. Everybody wants to be your bank baby. Everybody wants something. That's when they control you, but that's also when you get loans at negative interest rate, so they actually pay you to take the loan to which you could pay off your student loan.


This is going to be a mascara the fuck out no. No, this is what you wanted. You wanted Universal basic income Here Comes This is going to end by the way, it's going to work. This is the crazy. Now the control will also work, but we was economy will be steerable. I mean all the I think that will that part will really work but let me tell you the apocalypse is coming and your going to need a Bitcoin at least one if you have hit points salesman. No, I was very anti Bitcoin really is very anti Bitcoin until I Sold a shitload of them as like $900 and I could have you know, I could have really made a lot of money. Yeah, I got him for nothing. You got people just gave him to me in the beginning and I denied it and then we look at 10 years and like okay, I'm what I'm what you I don't fuck all the alt coins and all that stuff.


That's what's going to give a shit about but here's the standard like why can't there be competing cryptocurrencies? Like why are we so do we have to Committed to one and if we do get committed to one is there the possibility of some sort of manipulations and we've seen with all the other currencies what can people get involved. Yeah money 10 years of data have shown the Bitcoin really is the only one that you can trust right. Now it really is that true. I said right for no reason. Yeah the way I did the way I see it. Yeah the way I see it. That's really the only one that you cannot manipulate and all of the other coins are based off of it, you know Andreas Antonopoulos.


No, the name Rings a brilliant. Brilliant Max Keiser, you know, okay Max Max Max has been saying this from day one. Anyway, we've enough historical information to see that that's right. But that is increased in value. No matter what you look at the u.s. Dollar back to my five thousand dollar truck in the 70s $50,000. Now that value of that dollar has diminished by 10% because they just been printing more and more money. Is that why or because it Communists is that what it is? Yeah. Well, of course pimp he's into Communists. So for sure the United States ruined the United the USSR with financial trickery for sure, but now we just defended my rope was it was a lot of it the Space Race?


Yeah. Exactly. Yeah, don't take their chance of trickery. There's no way there was all about devaluation. It was really it was really quite amazed multiple levels of them good They're fucking that's good, you know a friend of mine who's a computer wizard was doing this thing where he was tracing these certain pages that were organizing like antifa rallies. Yeah, and he would follow the IP back to Russia. Yeah, like what the fuck man maybe Russia maybe China what the fuck we had? Yeah, Hillary Clinton called them techno experts and we sent them in to the fucking Balkans, Ukraine. We did all that.


That's all our techno. Experts right. Now. You have Belarus, you know people are protesting and it's really being organized around 1 telegram Channel called Next ra and these guys worked for us State Department. Yeah, they got pictures and selfies of themselves and the state department the obviously some kind of propaganda outfit but there they have, you know, two million followers and those people like okay we go protest over here a lot like black lives matter, you know, this stuff is but in coordinate, but again, very interesting way this it's so Important talk about Nuance. This is and not being connected to any ideas. This is my view man. Oh, no, I'm thinking today. I think I got no a jacket.


You're right. Hmm. You're also not right. There's also a bunch of people that are involved in that that really have good intention, of course a time traveler lysing to them. No. No, that's not even generalizing you're stating a fact that foreign interests are manipulating our outrage. That's a fact. Yeah, but we're also doing it to other country. We aren't and we're doing internally as well. No horse Renee derosa's. Yes, she was yes. She was in on this podcast. Yeah, it's very interesting because that company that you work for actually apparently worked for the special election in Georgia think it was and actually applied some of those tactics it was is that is that for sure 100% I don't know shit a hundred percent.


I made me think maybe that is true with the company that she works for but I don't may not have been involved in. I do not believe she would have been but I'm she's a very interesting person they knew how to do it. They had figured out how to do this stuff her. Cast with Sam Harris have you really? Yeah, and I think I've heard this is a couple years back when we get to two years back and that's around the time Jamie. When was the name of that group? She was with because it was a foundation antenna newer company and the data for democracy and I know a bunch of people who was the first one new knowledge knowledge. No bunch of people said that they were involved in some some things that mirrored some of the things she was talking about, but I'm like, maybe they were but there's no I mean, I don't think there was there was a shot the company she works for she's an individual, you know.


No, right as an individual lovely absolutely but as an individual talking to her about all these different memes and all these different companies that were these people that were involved in Russia from the IRA the internet research agency. Like they're actively manipulating outrage. They're trying to fuck with people that try to make people upset and it's working. Yeah, but this is being done what everyone's doing this but isn't there the marketing companies doing for the clients that fast food companies Burger King McDonald's they like going to war they like I'm fast on social media all the time. They're like upping one other. Fuck you Burger King. Fuck you Pizza Hut this is this is completely cultural shit is changing man is the real lucky right now is a silent killer.


Yeah. Yeah with your ads. Even you like Whataburger. Yes, you try to Whataburger you like Waterberg. You guys are cute with your Water Burger comparison to In and Out you can eat shit, but what a great by the way even in and out Losses to Five Guys. How about that Whataburger uses special people to serve Five Guys uses jalapenos. You know, I'm talking about James Yeah murderers. So we have mentally challenged people survive Whataburger and they're fucking fantastic and they will talk about the ketchup and you can add they recognize you're in a hurry. You then you should not be going to Waterbury go to fucking out a burger there you Five Guys whatever you want.


You got deserve the Water Burger experience. You can't be in a hurry at either one of those places. Yeah, both of those the mountain weather awesome as they cook them right in front of you. See it's like cook em right in front of you or I hate myself and I want Jack-in-the-Box. Those are the questions. Yeah that we need to answer. Yeah. I'm really only a Burger King or McDonald's dude. My issue would be late at night coming on from Comedy if I was exhausted and tired. I did like TV shows. Irvine Improv then I drove the our to I'm going to stop at McDonald's eat three filet of fish like a fucking wolf. I need it. Hey now you're going to miss you hang their the comedy comedy store. It doesn't exist right now, and it's currently banned, you know, it's not banned alcohol alcohol is somehow know the better than jokes.


Yeah, we're drinking themselves to death and hanging themselves from ceiling fans. So I need to talk to you talk to you about his vision part because we can do something about I think we can and that the vision part. I'm reluctantly coming to the acceptance that this stupid fucking show that I created a long time ago. Brian Red Band young Jamie Vernon has some sort of social responsibility because I mean it's amount of people that listen. I don't want I'm a more wrong. You're not supposed to be taking advice from me. If I connect you to people that are interesting congratulations, but trust me. I like you. I'm trying to figure my own things out.


If I'm thirteen steps ahead in terms of like we're running a marathon 13 steps ahead of you or 13 steps behind. We're all doing the same thing. We're all just trying to get better wherever we are at any point in time. We're trying to get better. And the best thing that anybody could ever encourage you to do is think for yourself use real critical thinking don't connect yourself because look people drive by me with American flags. I'm a sucker. Okay. I'm a sucker for America. I love America. My grandparents came here from Italy. They had a great goddamn time. They created my mom. They created me and my sister we are Americans so I see that flag of my fuck.


Yeah. Yeah, America, baby fucking America. Mmm, but I think there's a problem with any kind of teams. There's a problem with any anytime we look at each other like where I'm at this and your that's a fuck you and I think we need this is what we need to abandon. We need to abandon our attachments to ideologies even ideologies that we haven't recognized as ideologies. Like, you know, like whatever the fuck it is. The problem is not Brown pride like Cain Velasquez, you know who he is? No, he's like one of the greatest UFC heavyweight of all time. The only thing that Kate capped him from being the goat, the greatest of all time ever is the fact that he kept getting injured.


He had a bunch of injuries like shoulder surgeries knee surgeries back surgery like he's had it he had to like a cage put around his spine, but when he was part of the problem was his will to fuck people up was stronger than his body and so he would push his body. ADI past its limits and he just kept getting injured but that's also what made him so special because when he was on top, he would just smash people just run through them. He's the most American motherfucker of all time because his dad walked here from Mexico his dad walked Walked from Mexico. He lives in San Jose no long that took that's a long fucking walk in his dad will still do it man worked hard and gave him a life then he became By opinion when he was at his best the greatest heavyweight I've ever seen in my opinion.


He was a force of Nature and saying cardio but his ability to overcome the feeling he pushed through things that other people weren't willing to that's why his body fell apart his knees blew out his back blue everything broke, but it was because his mind was so strong, right? That's America. That's America. Yeah, like that's as American as it gets as in my roots from Ireland, Scotland. And Germany exactly the same. So what if we're very sensitive we're very sad. I think the root of most of this is coming from the racial issue black white and and we need we need to Define some terms and this I think is very helpful instead of saying African-American black American black Negro, whatever we've had in the past.


I prefer a Das which is a lot of people understand this now, which is American descendant of slavery that That makes it very clear who you're talking about. So you can say black but Kamala Harris not black black. Yes, black and color but not American descendant of so you would make it clear distinction between an American descendant of slavery and someone who'd if you want to fucking fix our country. Yeah, we got to do that if we want to fix our country. This is what we have to do Malcolm X said before he became, you know Nation of Islam crazy little off the radar for me. He said the only way to fix the racial problem in the United States of America. Is have a white man and a black man, sit down at the table and work the fucking shit out.


That's what he said. I've been doing that for a year. Yeah, Isaac's of podcast Mo facts without him Curry, but I've been talking to him. I've been talking to this. This is exactly how he started calling me explain to me with a Doss was I was trying to figure it out. I know agenda and we were talking for an hour once a week. I said fuck it. This is a podcast and I have gotten an education in hit. He's like she ever wears enemy whose he is Mo facts.com Mo E fac. TZ Mo fact is our his real name. His name is Moe. This film is short for Maurice but it's not facts. Is that his last name? No, imagine if it was that. Well, she's like he was born face. He's like the Dalai Lama. Well, it's like Trump is 45 Savage. You know, you got to have your you got to have it.


Does that mean 45 Savage 45th? President 45 Savage? What is 45 Savage? That's President Trump, but what that's his nickname. Hello some Hannah there. I'm younger than you. You but older than you I got lucky this time. I got fucking lucky. Yeah anyway talking about so listen the country. What if what if our problem? So when when you have a Doss American descendants of slavery which MO is one right? If you have a dolls when politicians say the black and brown Community, they feel fucked because it's not just the black very this is a group of very special Americans who deserve to be recognized this Right.


This is why they've always been LED down the path of voting Democrat. And now there's all the shit is in play. That's why black white is always played on us because that's our weak spot. That's her Achilles heel. We're embarrassed about it. Yeah, I agree with you. Fuck you America. I love my country. I love our country, but we have some fucked up shit. That would we instead of dealing with it. We're letting other people. Hijack us over it. That's what's going on here, and it's not racism that we suffer from it's nepotism. Mmm, it's nepotism and I'll explain why if you truly was and I can tell you right systemic racism absolutely existed in America and it went all the way up into the 70s with no man about the house rule when they came up from the south and went into the projects created by I guess FDR and you know, because that they typically ate their own food now they're coming here to work.


So the Project's repeated and Welfare, but you could not have a man in the house and this one into the Have patrols making sure that there was no family with children and a father now. We have 75 percent of all children in America without a father in the household you and I we got parent privileged White Privilege parent privileged a man. My dad was didn't work out the great with us, but he did put some shit in to me and I grew up and he was around and there was some that influence was there. That's our problem who's running black lives matter now. Amy one male leader of black lives matter. No, it's all women and I have no problem with it.


But I do question what's going on? I can't argue with you there because I don't know who the leaders are. Oh Patrice colors. There's a number of women who? Yeah, and they all come from the old radical kind of marxist. Just one more thing. True communist in 1936 try to that want to come and overthrow America. It's been going on for a long time. We try to export democracy. They try to bring socialism into US clear. We do it by blowing your country up and rebuilding it and they do it other ways. They came in they wanted to propagate this message and no white people came, but the poor black people came and so they became very associated with Marxism a leftist ideas, and they were basically Taken through into what is today is I guess the Democratic party and that's not working anymore because this just strife and there's no real solutions.


And even the first African American president not a Doss didn't really deliver for them. So this is this election this time right now. It's fucking they're fucking with us because of this one thing for their own power left and right. Is it a is it a that was excellent joint? I smoked earlier. It's very good. Very good stuff. Yeah. Congratulation. Thank you. Is it possible that we're in this weird state with people because we've decided that we're losing power and other aspects of our life.


So we're getting more and more determined to take it back in other places because the fact that so many people have been denied. The ability to make a living. I mean it's kind of crazy. Yes mean. I don't know what to think about it, but it seems to me that if I'm allowed to go to certain essential businesses with a mask on and no one's dying. I mean if I'm going to a supermarket and everyone's wearing a mask everybody seems okay, right and scientists seem to think they're okay like it. What point in time do we allow that for every where and at what point in time do we allow people to take chances? We allow people to flip dirt. Bikes we allow people to fucking jump out of helicopters.


We allow people do all kinds of crazy shit. We allow people to wingsuit. Why don't we allow people to not wear a mask? Why don't we allow people to open up their business? Why don't we allow people to do whatever they wanted to do. Is it the really the right and the ideas. Well, you have to protect us the other people the I agree you do have to protect protect the other people but one of the things that's going to make the other people more vulnerable is the collapse the economy and we're not saying that for Reason there's this weird thing where politicians want you to love them and they want you to love them. So if you are leaning towards defunding the Belize and and and making sure that all the socialism ideas get accepted into major universities and it gets taught in the curriculum and grade school.


If you drone on enough in the person who's running for mayor knows the only way that they can win is to embrace your ideas. They're going to fucking do it. It's because it dirty system doesn't It make any sense and you should be able to vote from your phone. Right but you can't write so we get this weird corrupted fucking intertwined system that it's all food. Ooh. Well, first of all every country gets the government she deserves the quest. The question is not why do we allow people to tell us what to do it is? Why are we allowing them to actually tell us what to fucking do who is no seriously we are afraid we've been The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.


This is a good one. It's one thing to say you playing mine crashed the car might crash might get hit by a car. You might die of an overdose. It's another thing to say so motherfucker without a mass might kill you bitch. That's some real fucking fear. And that's not to be taken lightly that is not to be too and they have they have fucked with us over this I don't care whether it's true or not or what's true or not the Cavalier nature of this shutdown and fear and colors and stages. Numbers and charts and connecting it to the stock market. I don't like that about President Trump at all. But see he looks at what he calls the economy. I don't know if he's behind this digital dollar or not. But I think we're all going to be taken care of the 10 million are going to be on a universal basic income and that's going to happen.


I'm not worried about that. But what are we left with and just where do we go from there is going to be the question because what is it? What is Joe Biden and Kamala Harris? His slogan, do you know what their slogan is? brain damage and prison time it should be Build back better. Hmm. So that's pretty that's pretty clever. Okay. It's so clever that the same slogan is used by the United Nations the green New Deal Organization three, six three fifty.org Boris Johnson is using it as his campaign Francois Macomb using it as his campaign.


Justin Trudeau build back better. This is a globalist plan Builder. Better this is what is almost plant. It means we're going to shut down all coal and and gas and fracking and we're going as much as possible the transition to solar and wind and sound like a good idea if it's feasible. Yeah, I don't think it's feasible and but but what is being promised with the green new deal as we will create good-paying green new jobs now, that's just a philosophy whether you think it's good or not right now. I don't think think so, but for sure, I know that Bill Gates who was a big part of you know, this green New Deal that he's investing in nuclear plants because when the sun don't shine in the window and blow you need some power and it's going to come from his nuclear plants.


How does Bill Gates have any ambition left? Man, maybe he's being blackmailed. What do you think he knows? No, I think he's being blackmailed of stuff. He's done. I don't know if you show that's what that sweater allegedly. Yeah, someone's got a picture of him with a tank top on doing doing the fucking most muscular. Yeah. You can't this is another thing man this whole Epstein business. This is gotten Millennials. What's that Bill Gates meets with Jeffrey Epstein many times despite his past. So this has gotten everyone nuts. The kids are going like that. Got any This is good though, because there's something there.


Obviously there's obviously something there obviously something there the wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait a minute you seem to be one of those guys is really in the conspiracies. No, let me bring us to analyze. Let me break this down. There's no way there's anything more to what you're seeing in the news when it comes to a story obviously use me, please sir about a man who traveled to fuck island with Bill Clinton. 26 times did he fly with Bill 26 times or you travel to the government just find me. They just took the money straight out of my digital doll. Yeah, you thought you were fucking connects to the internet.


This is what so beautiful man. You're you're in the universe. I'm in the universe Dave Rubens in the universe been Shapiro's in the universe. Alex Jones is neither people are there's a whole new structure it we had were out of control. We don't know. What the fuck they're doing they're going to try and control all of us one way or the other. Yes, but the internet we pretty much have that we got free rein man do but we don't have it now. Yeah, we got so much we have a lot but there's also a lot of censorship. I mean if you don't need any of that you could have mastered on you got your own network. You don't socialize you don't need. Yeah, but let's be realistic when it comes down to it Joe for sure.


But there's a lot of people that had prominent voices that are silenced. Yeah, right, but they're not very It in a much smaller Circle. I'm I'm prominent in a circle it got bigger once I visited you and I hope that yours got bigger as well. And the two can be completely unaware of each other and crossovers happen and and the network starts to grow. It's a whole new way of communicating. No, I understand that and I bet I know you appreciate it. I do what's happening before that you're the year, but there's certain people that just get banned forever from some social media platforms. Yeah. Not from other ones. That's my point. Yeah, but in this environment shouldn't we take into account?


Like if you were going to ban someone if you're going to like say listen, there's a rational expectation that a person should be able to say your beliefs are not aligned with theirs. They're going to kick you off this business that they own as long as the bit like but blankets to be YouTube and you have Thirty 1 million subscribers and how many hours 500 500 hours of me. Minute. Yeah, it's such a pipeline. Like you can't tell me you're really monitoring this thing correctly. It's not possible. No, of course not that's why we have everything has to be distributed has to but I think there should be much more stringent rules on whether or not you can ban someone.


Oh I so don't give a flying fuck about what Facebook or YouTube or Google do. It's so unimportant in the vast scale of what we can do and I understand that and I agree but in the end. Isabel the person who has the YouTube channel who is earned this position and Gamma and got screwed. I got screwed. That's not fair. No. It's not awful not rationale that they could just do it. They don't have to go through a lengthy Court proceeding that you just remove your income a couple of things. I believe on the commercial platforms that were talking about in this case. The problem is the business model advertisers don't like controversy advertising has gone down drastically since the word coronavirus or covid-19.


In which blocks because they didn't want controversy. So that's the reason why these networks do it. They I don't think they yes, there's people who ban conservatives specifically but that's because of the elite messaging system the mainstream media also the pharmaceutical industry the lot of Finance is this message. So that's what advertisers want. Look with the pussies that the NBA are in Nike they kowtow to everybody. Yes. I said it look at how they kowtow and what they will And will not allow so that's all money based very capitalistic. By the way, that's totally cool. But now we go to the way you and I were raised you what you notify your 52 52 53 now yeah 56 tomorrow basically halfway dead.


No, I want to be one of those. I got it. I'm going to be 98. That's my that's my Target 98. Yeah why that number I don't know but my grandma I bring my grandparents both lived to 98 my paternal. Parents. The reason why I brought up Gavin is that I think that they're I've I have had a couple podcast with him and people have had like weird conversations me about her and I've said this is one of the things that are set aside the guys mostly fun. Yeah, mostly fun. And like anybody that does while shit you can get lost in the woods and if you get lost in the woods of race or or or whether or not people should be able able to able to do drugs or whether or not People should get paid minimum wage.


That's a livable wage. You get lost in the woods and any ideology and it becomes a problem. Let's go back for whatever reason when when someone shifts one way or another and we conflict with though as those ideas. We never give anybody any room for for just being a person most of the time I've been around that guy. He's a nice guy, but let's go to the basics of how I there's two things. I was taught growing up sticks and stones will break my bones, but names will never hurt me. Secondary. Okay, I will defer Isaiah has created in the depression no longer fucking terrible. I don't so mean exactly and I can pinpoint when that happen to so we had that and then the I don't like what you say, but I will defend to the death your right to say it.


These were the two core values that I was raised. That's what I'm talking about. That's what I'm talking about with everybody. Whether it's Alex. Those were the core values and McGinnis land. That is our constitutional deal. Yes. That's the deal and this Includes Louis Farrakhan doesn't yeah, everyone everybody everybody everybody. It's so calm everybody jump tell me what you think bro. Exactly every right all of them. And this is why this is so important the moment. We stop other people from expressing their opinions. We first of all we are coddling everybody else trying to pretend we're gonna happen but what happens when that other people are dumber than us, like I know I know that that preacher's full of shit, but I need to protect you out of Curry because You might just give up your money for this one person because he needs a new jet.


Okay, right. So this started about six years ago. When hate speech came into the conversation. Yeah and bullying and bullying became bullying laws, which I remember because we were doing the show. I don't like this is actual First Amendment violation to create a law that says you can't say something mean about somebody else that's bullshit. Now it may not be nice. It may not be appropriate in the setting of a not over according to the school rules, but actual laws were created. So now we have hate speech and hate crimes which is really undefinable. But it's all it's all sadly all geared towards controlling what the fuck you can say.


Well, it's a natural human instinct when you have power to exert it. Yeah, it's natural. Yeah, it's why there's Al for to good man. We're nice fucking people and we let Let us men be treated as doofuses in every single commercial every TV show. Oh, sorry, honey. I got the wrong washing powder. You know why we do that because we want to fuck and we want I know we got to get over that shot the why I've gotta get over that shit. Once you learn, you know, once you learn that that woman is just as high sex-crazed as you are. She just has a different way of expressing it once you figure that out and you play that game and they play your game and you know the game and your fucking equal, bro.


That's when Stark know I found that I'm telling you I found that with my wife when that shit happens. That's it. And this is what is happened is what happened with Donald Trump. This is what I truly believe. I agree with you by the way, I'm joking around. I know you do. I know you girls. I love that you give me shit because it makes it all coded and people who are really listening will get it people are like, you know supporter of Gavin McInnes. I'm a supporter of human beings. They got triggered two hours ago. I'm also a supporter of people that are radically left wing. In that story with a lot of them just need hugs. We need to be embraced by our community. We dig our heels in and we fight against anyone that we think opposes our safety our security and our comfort in our on our ability to be fitted to feel loved and to be happy.


Here's where you in particular can change the world Jesus Christ. I want to lay it on you bro. Yes, you can change the walk-in pot father and just by the A shout out to Texas Silver Star whiskey Hee-Haw motherfucker. That's very good. It's good shit. It's very smooth. What can I do to save the world so feel like I'm in the Watchmen before before all yeah, exactly before all this BLM stuff came in it was made toxic masculinity. And a lot of a lot of it, of course me too and a lot of it absolutely right and there's a lot of that bullshit. But yeah.


We let we let them cut our gonads off and we need to stand up a little bit. Not that women can't do what we need to do right now, which is take control the fucking situation in more ways than one but we need to help the shepherd them. I know a lot of badass women. So do you who could fuck anything and anybody up and they're great and they could be great leaders, but we need to Shepherd the whole civilization of men and women in particular men and men with their families. Typically in a toss, that's where we need to see this happen. And that's why Trump is going to probably sweep the election with a male black vote who are sick of this shit and they see it and they're going ads dropped they went.


You know, what fuck? Yeah, and so it's this is not a bad thing. This is very very good. It's very good its controversial. I'm sure because people just don't like to hear that and I and I'm like you man LGBT ET Q IA P k+. I know the whole fucking acronym forwards and backwards I grew up in Amsterdam hello, but I'm anti-war, you know, I don't like spending like a motherfucker with the government. I don't want a digital dollar but I do want love and peace and everything that we can have. I got this. This would be either or right. It doesn't have no matter who's up there.


Against them, you know, the kind of prejudice that I receive is so minimal. It's a really it's offencive if you discuss it, but with but one Prejudice that I've always encountered is that I'm a bro. What the fuck is that but it's valid it's the thing if I was if I was someone who wasn't a bro and I saw me I'd like that guy's a bro. It's not bad that they look at it that way in a sense that's their job if you're going to mock. Fuck the the opposing idea. Yeah, and the opposing ideas easily mockable. Yeah as a mine. Yeah, it's you're supposed to do it. It's mean it's isn't feeling it.


No, but it is it is it's mean it doesn't feel mean I'm okay. I just work out a lot. I've go through it all like whatever they're throwing at me. I burn it off. It doesn't feel mean. Yeah because I was them I've been that person who was disenfranchised and lonely. And disconnected and didn't have like real close friends and didn't have a real like Community where I could say, I'm protected I'm connected. I didn't have that. So I understand all sorts of weird unnecessary anger that people have but my perspective is we have to look at the world that we exist in currently as a series of pipelines to your consciousness.


And you have to limit the amount of entries because there's so there's only a certain amount of bandwidth that you have to managing life. If you have a thing you love whether that thing is you are a songwriter and a singer and you have you have these thoughts these emotions that you wish you could figure out a way where other people can see the beauty in your perspective and to put it through a song that rhymes with the perfect notes on the guitar and just get into someone's consciousness. Make them feel better you want to do that? Right? And this is what what it is to be a person with this is a lot of kids 2230.


I just call them kids are doing this. Now. They're disconnecting their unhooking the getting flip phones. They got no cable subscription. And this is their poor and oppressed. No income is very best. If to eat the rich, I know several homeless guys, and they all have phones and they got an A. Data plans and it's no problem. It's you can be almost America with a smartphone and La that's a real problem. You can camp. It's the same here right now. Minnesota doesn't have a whole lot of homeless people that make it in the winter. No, no. No, it's just hard out there. You gotta get a job. Now. This is this is a dumb idea. The way Austin went about this Austin's not the worst LA's way Dumber LA's Preposterous.


It's so sad. What what has happened to all of California l They have those sad Boulder, Colorado inside of it. Yeah, but home yet homeless. Yeah, we didn't even know what the numbers are. They were 70,000 when the economy was booming. Yeah. Yeah, when the economy was at its peak couple of years ago. There was seventy thousand homeless people in Los Angeles. What's the current estimate laughs but I think we talked about this before that the primary cause of homelessness is catastrophic loss of family. There's that but there's also drug addiction but that would like comes along with it. But yeah, maybe a lot of people are abused. There's a lot of factors but I think severe perturbance of your development emotionally psychologically as a child contributes greatly to you being homeless person even drug users our community.


Yes, so then they have their own community of drug use and scoring and whatever else was still a community was under the bridge wants Them underpasses that was Campground and I was looking at these dudes just hanging out talking to each other. I'm like if you didn't have nothing this might be a better place to be I want to take you to Community First Village here. I've just a little bit outside of Austin trying to give me tuberculosis or some other sort of yeah, it'll be it'll blow your mind. When you see this typhus. This is just small tiny homes. Okay. This is a nonprofit that set it up and they are getting people back on their feet in their community in their own community. And it's no policing its really magical.


What's happening there? This was my reason why I thought that Universal basic income is a good idea what I thought of as not Not an impossible like you can live off of it sort of but it's a struggle just enough so you can get by that's the idea. So this is yeah give Pete just just say listen, there's something wrong if Bankers can make a trillion dollars a month like whatever the fuck the number is there something wrong. How about this? Let's figure out a way to organize taxes so that people get enough so that no one in America.


Still starve to death if we were kind people who truly patriotic the number one goal would be no one who lives in America should starve to death, right? Correct. That's number one. And then from there we move on to other things, right? That's a good way to start and I'm here to tell you again. It's coming and I think the number will be 24 to 25 hundred dollars a month. And anyone who has has or is has sore is making less than 75,000 dollars will get that. That's ridiculous. It's gonna happen but isn't if you make more than 50 Grand a year shouldn't you be on your own like listen, bro?


Look help the system out disconnect. You want to try living in Austin and fifty Grand a year. I like it. I like tent living. Yeah. Well, okay, you're in by battery. You're in you're in you're in well in that case you're in. No, you're right. But what I'm saying is we don't want people starving to death. No, we don't want people ever being in a situation where they don't know. We're going to get shelter. Okay, so where we need another his but but hold on but is the situation where it's at because of unintended uncontrollable circumstances like covid where everybody is like what the fuck who who who would have told you you need to have a year supply of money and food.


No, it's totally would have told you that right, but that's where we are now, so you can't blame those people. It's our mentality our mentality. Which went away from True Community helping each other often that was situated around a church. That's why you know, we have none still, you know, the kind of with the hospital Services all kinds of services barter services with the butcher if you only had wheat Etc and we've moved towards this man in the middle. Hey my fucking neighbors and asshole, we don't go over anymore and talk to the neighbor and say bro. Can we talk? No. Hello? 911 my neighbors being an asshole everything. We have a goddamn middleman for that is our own fault. We need to realize that It that we do need to communicate peer-to-peer at some point to have you can't have a community if you only talking through lawyers and and that's true eating but every now and then you get a neighbor like Rand Paul Rand.


Paul's neighbor fucking tackles your breaks your ribs, please do yeah that can happen. What do you do with that guy? You need to have someone you can call. I'm not against that. I'm not against that I'm just saying but so that neighbor he didn't call the police and say Rand Paul's a fucking right-wing racist. Restore whatever he went over there and beat his ass and that's sad where Rand Paul should have just shot his ass. Well, no, no no, yes. Yes. Yes acting from behind. Yes. Yes took him down from behind. He broke his ribs. Regardless. You should have shot him later. You get my point that everything here every covid sneeze has a lawyer attached to it. Everything's a fucking legal Affairs. We're always did. I'm sure in all deals you've done is a manager and lawyers and accountants and like and that motherfucker goes down the line.


If you know, you know, if I could just sit with the guy for two minutes like bro, let's do this right now entanglements. Thanks gives away the world deeper and deeper and we're all that's what's so beautiful about life. And this is a great time. Well great time for your podcast. ER it's beautiful about life because all of these things that have happened whether it's the internet or the electric car or anything air travel, it's someone competing against other people that are also formulating similar ideas. This is just what we've had and what We're experiencing today is a massive moment of chaos, which in my personal life has always been followed by a great growth.


Yes always yes, because my personal life and I believe in the microcosm and I believe in the macrocosm and I believe this is a situation where a thing that you feel that you / if you can express it the right way it resonates with people and it can help everybody. I really do believe that. Yes. I think it's part of one of the the more fascinating things about the way we feel when other human beings Express themselves, whether it's a speech to a graduating class, you know, whether it's a book that you wrote or a film that you made there's something that people do that makes other people feel certain way and we recognize it when we're creating it and the what those things are those moments of energy.


We're all come together in the Segment we can maximize those we can have more of them instead of being in conflict over fucking whether or not Ellen DeGeneres is a bitch but let's just let's figure out a way to be just stop just be nice. There's this better feelings for yourself and for the community and for all around you by just just putting your energy into positive things putting your energy into things that are beneficial. It's easy to attack. It's easy your Global which makes it's oh great. This is happening in every country around the world black lives matter racial Strife racial division, very different story than us. It's in the UK.


It's in the Netherlands that everybody has some story and but it's all different. They should not have the same guilt maybe that we should have but it's being used as a wedge to divide people and I think that we have enough platforms enough reach to let people know that figure it out go look around but you're definitely being manipulated and the whole idea. Is not to have that happen what you just said and we have the means we don't need to go to Every mainstream Silicon Valley company to communicate with each other. So that is there for us at the taking we just have to do it is that simple? We have all this power. We're just not using it yet.


But there's always conflict between human beings. Of course there always will be because there's there's a desirable mating outcomes, and there's yellow you wanted each other online yellow you You want that's great. I hope we find places in there are many already for people to go yell without anyone intervening or taking down. Just let him yell yet. Let him yell. Let him yell. Let him yell is good Let It Go, let it all out taking someone away is fucking stupid. It's short-sighted and stupid for short-term capital gain what I'm talking about in terms of censoring people online. I think it actually has unintended consequences of bolstering up the other side.


Course it does because it makes them look like versus the people on the right. Now. Look at the people in the left as being unreasonable unwilling to talk and they banned this person from Facebook and YouTube. Yeah. So now I got to go back to my America Online analogy because it's inevitable. This is what always happens America Online was a closed system and the internet was out here and everyone on AOL. I'm sure you were on there like, oh cool chat room, not me bro. Yeah, you were looking up conspiracy theory shutter broker. I know. What you were doing you and you have fun Meanwhile, we're on the free internet going all dot conspiracy dot Alien Probe in my anus and well, I got a picture of it and all this and so we're having a good time and kids on the AOL.


When hey AOL, we want to access the internet man. We want the fucking internet because that's where the dangerous that's cool stuff is and they finally opened up a little portal. Okay. Here's your browser and everybody was gone and a oh became a dial-up access service because everybody will remember this. We want the Yes, man. I was ever started this shit for this. Yeah. You've got mail pretty good. Right. Goodbye. Goodbye. Solid. So is it dude telling you you've got mail. That's your boss. So that's not Chinese lady. That's where it's always going to be at my friend. That's always going to be the dangerous outside.


That's where I like to live and Thrive. Well, there's always going to be the tip of progress and everything else underneath. Yes. To be but the question is who's right? When you see these people in Portland that are fucking burning trash in the lobby of the mayor's apartment complex. Are they right? When they hold it up a fucking big sheet that says resign are they right? I don't mind about this big sheet with resigned. You can't be you can't be making fire. That's not okay. It's not okay. You kill all those people like if you live that if they threw that fire in and they didn't know that the floor was plastic the plastic took off on a bike since Lee and burn the whole and everybody in this how many fuck it I think there's like 1,200 good news.


The good news is this shit is starting to end because is it Joe Biden campaign realized that this was not good for their numbers. And so now they're out saying you should stop writing stop riding. That's a real danger that they it may take hours and I had one of their old managers Lieber Krabs I had and you know, even if there was good or bad. But between them but they were so that was so nice man. They all signed it. You know, it wasn't just a bullshit of x + 2. / yeah. I only really interacted with him a little bit. He's a sweetheart. Yeah, of course he is but those guys went through a lot of shit.


There's no nearly they really on his fake knees. Yeah. I tried to send them to a stem cell doctor. He's not taking any opioids or anything for the pain is because that's what I don't believe that scares me cause that's what did Princeton well he got fencing. Right, Tom Petty. Yeah, same thing. Yeah Fox, we don't know when it just bring it back all this great that pulls back and say we're backwards and we're back. That was wonderful. I'm here because of you. I said that at the beginning yes, but it is true. Now. I want to know about your other plans. So Tina the keeper my wife and I we've been catching up on Little Joe Rogan history. We've been watching your stand-ups during the shutdown you my friend are one funny motherfucker.


And you do physical shit and you're so on and it's just where you gonna use this Creative Energy this side of you in the world. I mean, what's the plan? Where does this go? What do you do as a Comics? I know that pod. I know your yeah you podcaster and obviously you're changing the world, but I know that I think I know that your core passion is that I love Santa, but I think it's really important to just be a person and if you I One comedy date during the pandemic. I did the Houston and problem. I did it with my friend Brian Moses and I did it with my friend Tony Hinchcliffe. We had a great fucking time.


I met Willie D from the Ghetto Boys Dan Crenshaw came down. We had a good time. But the the end of the day I was like damn I want to catch it and give it to somebody I care about right is I'm because you're not even doing right if I knew that I couldn't ever give it to somebody I can only get it myself. Elf I have a different perspective. Yeah, and I'd probably be with you. I think you've already you've already adjusted your risk profile. And yesterday when I was here. I got the antibody tests and everything still hurt doesn't it? And well I use this finger a lot but apparently is trigger finger. I use it for Mouse click my sensitive little thing there but right away, you know, even without even waiting for the results you like.


Nah, bro, you don't have it. You're good. Listen, which is appropriate if you're not probably how we've always. He's taken. This is the view of people we've always taken if you look healthy and you feel healthy. You're probably help. Yeah. Yeah. This is what it's crazy to think it that way, isn't it? Yeah dead now, we're like you might have it but it's understandable because when it did emerge on North America, we thought it was going to be like the plague we thought I was gonna be like the Spanish. We were we were shown models. Everything might have been right and they might have been wrong fortunately they were I'm wrong. But this idea that it's a conspiracy. I'm not buying it.


But all of it. I think it's the more than anything. There are people that take advantage of moments of things that happen. But there's also people just panic and make good moves and bad moves and they don't necessarily have to make sense in retrospect. We got wasn't wasn't the right call in terms of like what we thought like the covid-19 was going to For this country, but they thought it was going to be way worse and if they were wrong and it was way worse, it would have been horrific. So what is the mechanism where the people in every country can communicate this back in a manner to the people who we've chosen to represent us that's not offensive to ball to take it into account.


This is how we feel and we need some change there were protests in Trafalgar Square the Brandenburg gate in Berlin and in Switzerland. As Erick and they were completely peaceful. Nobody with Master saying hey, we want out we want now we have here other problems going out is now an issue because of rioting and protesting but in general people around the world are starting to say we don't like this and they're trying to communicate it. We are the only fuckers who have the guns to back it up, right? That's what's interesting right now because that's also what therefore that's also what the second amendment is about is to I in my mind to protect the first I would also like hey, we all the people here.


I don't want this and we're kind of willing to back it up. So here we are with our stuff here. It's such a strange perspective fucking its medieval Joe. But here we are. We haven't done our we haven't learned our history. We haven't looked at it properly. You see the video of what happened in Portland when they're yeah, I did. Yeah, of course, of course, it's like basic tribal War one guy sprays Mesa the guy she was a gun my buddy Mo he says, This is a civil war between white people were stepping the fuck back and he's right man. He's right here. Yes, but room but now more than ever we need to get together with our adolf's brothers and sisters and say stop.


This is bullshit. We're not this is not the real problem here. Stop it. Now. Well anytime you have an open group that anyone can join talking to get people hard that do the dumbest shit to get to the front of the line at the top of the Heap, but we does Necessarily jive with the ideas of the rest of the organization ldren have been over socialized. They've been made to be afraid of everything. They say can't make a joke about Christians can't make a joke about Jews can't make a joke about gay lesbian transgender can't make a joke about can't even slip up on one little thing. Forget race. Are you doing the work Joe Rogan? You've got to read the book. This is fuck. That's white fragility by Robyn D'Angelo the biggest perpetrator of this crap I've ever heard of that but I read Matt Taibbi is response spot on Taibbi is a legend.


I pay my PSI pay for his content. I'll pay him for you all day. I'll pay him $400 a month. That's that guy is doing the work in a real whale he's one of the most important journal the only guy who reported on the Wall Street 2008 and he had to go and learn all how all this intricate shit work. He's fucking great. He's a real representative of his honest opinions and That's where a journalist is. That's the problem a journalist. It's because we've gotten hooked into these systems whether it's right or left or whatever it is where your vested interest is in agreeing with whatever the people on your side think and say, it's just real dangerous for people.


It's not how we operate. Well, then there's another problem and that is what we all used to see was the typical local news. You see your, you know today show on NBC they breaking with the Local weather and the message what we saw in Wisconsin is we saw a struggle. We saw cops walking behind the guy we saw the guy trying to get into his car the cop pulling them back shooting. We saw that what is distilled down to the Today show local level is unarmed black man shot by cops will getting into car right? I don't care what happened you can't present.


At as the facts that we've seen that's bullshit. So either don't do it or show it or maybe just wait until we have some information because that is setting a Tobias message that it and by the way Fox News just as complicit on all sides of this with the fuck knows who's running this show should be something along the lines of police shoot man. Thank you. That would be a good starter. Yeah, but I mean, is it that way? We have this expectation for whether it's Reuters or CNN or whatever for them to be authoritative. Perfect. Perfect. Yeah. Perfect. This is what happened turns out.


No, the problem is sometimes out know this money involved and if they can say police shoot black man. Unarmed black man, that's worth more money. Yeah. Yeah, that's a real. Yeah. Is that a consideration? You think when they write headlines? Yes completely. I just The other Shore Texas mandates vaccines for all school children. I'm like, all right. Let me take a look blood about blah blah. Of course, Texas has a conscientious objections. Give me a fucking break. Is that like naturopathic news.com like no. No that was you know, that was like, you know mainstream really?


Yeah mainstream like, you know an affiliate of Reuters or whatever. Yeah, that's the problem. Is that sure like, I know that everybody. He thinks they're they're fighting the good fight. I really do believe that course we do that. So what makes us so great. It's a think about people. It's so easy for us to accept one ideology versus another. Well, we just have to remember one thing. We just have been this is the thing. That's most shocking. There is it's okay to disagree. It's okay to be angry with each other. We're just looking to Jamie's at he was going ahead to try casserole pan. Looks like you were at Smashers back to James broke his ass responsible.


Really really broke his ass. Yeah, we had those hoverboards. I was broke my ass too. It's Jamie was filming it. Yeah and hoverboard went left. He went right and he landed on his eye me on your hoverboard explain. Yeah. I have to only assume that's what caused it. But the actual like injury didn't come for like ten months after that. So Look at it was a fraction actual broken ass. I think I didn't get an x-ray but there was a bone that was not where it was supposed to be that caused Litany of problems up and down the side of my body a bone. That wasn't where it was supposed to be a little Bonaparte of your hip. That's like it's break off or like it's just like was adjusted in a weird spot. I could if I feel it now doesn't feel like it used to wow, like I can clear classic pop crazy thing about stuff Chiropractic shit, right?


It's like even though it has a wacky beginning what if it dude, It was accidentally right I still here like right now I have weird crazy pops. My neck that likes hurt sometimes but right I don't know if a chiropractor could fix it. You know, I'm saying like if you hear the story about like who was the woman that wrote chiropractors are bullshit. I don't know. Was it that there's a there's a guy who is a producer of my show and he's like I really want you to give this to Joe. He's all about Chiropractic and apparently you're against that don't believe in it or whatever. It's like and he's real.


It's like really like dude. I just wanted Joe to see it and this is one guy he could talk to and it's very interesting because I don't know anything about the controversy whatever. It's just very interesting who wrote a Jamie. Yeah, if that yeah. Yeah. I knew I just didn't want to fuck her last name the Entre malt. She was a guest on the podcast and she research practice. Okay is pretty know this created by a dude who is a magnetic healer and he was killed by his son ran him over with a car took over the business. Okay started promoting the idea that time with magnets Justin people's backs to fix like fucking leukemia. Oh, I don't know about you just pop people's that it was luminous.


Hmm But I think what if maybe they were onto something accidentally like it is possible. Well, that's like my applied Kinesiology which you don't believe in. What does that apply to me? And I've been going to sure I don't believe in it because we talked about it after the show last night my mind. Okay. Well and by the way, when you call two days after the show that was that was a thrill like holy shit. Joe fucking broken just called me. You texted me. You called me. You called me. If that wasn't really it bothers me. That is a thrill like no that was like no because I remember Lee I really connected with you as cool. We did we did a good connection.


I like that. I really do appreciate you as being there the your patient zero you really are there's a guy who started this whole thing a hundred percent. There's no one else who deserves the credit. It's you and your you're also an interesting guy because you you've always had an analytical view of anything whether whatever. Problems there are technological political you look at it. And when I listen to podcasts like this guy's thinking about what what's going on here. Is this happening is that happening? You just you're not committed to anyone know like cleanly grooved path know like you I have a lot of people who I'm connected to and particularly because of the show you are connected to some of the most amazing Minds that are out there and you suck that up.


It's crazy. Suck it up. It's true. You memorize stuff. I have the same thing. You memorize stuff. Okay, that's interesting and you can way that but ultimately I don't think either of us really come from any like I really want it to be like this or that no, it's just pure luck. Yeah. Yeah pure luck in. What the fuck is this? But this is a crazy crazy time. We are so connected. There's so much so many impulses so many signals so much happened mayor of Portland get out of that fucking apartment building. They know where you're sleeping, bro. A thousand other people sleeping in that building. Yeah a good chance all of that ends November 4th. Yeah good chance a lot of things and November 4th September.


Yeah, they're gonna light that guy's place on fire. But that doesn't I kind of show that it's out of control. Something has to happen. What if the reason why all this shit is going on up there. I just a little taste of what's going on the world. Yes depressed. It's like a big old Twilight movie. Oh, I got my trained on shit. My buddy used to be my assistant back at MTV who was the Vijay was a VJ coordinator Ken and he's he took this all and I Love Ken to death he Good hook line and sinker and he hasn't he and his Husband haven't seen another human being for four or five months.


They have like nothing. Nothing came in. Nothing came out. All he knows is that Trump has sent in goons to go and and create a problem in downtown Portland is a lack of real information for a lot of people. Yeah, there's a lack of information and it's just I'm not saying one way or the other, but all I know I'm seeing President Trump doing some very interesting shit and he's standing in the middle of things. I thought of been a problem for a long time the media for sure. He calls it fake news the pharmaceutical industry lot of bullshit. He's sitting right there going this is bullshit and while he's still making a lot of interesting thing happened that I don't think it's good.


He's also removed the pharmacy benefit managers. So actually the prices will actually come down. He's Digger deregulated and sure. You can do it across state lines. These are all things. I think are very very good you standing in the middle of the military-industrial complex saying is the fucking military industrial complex. They want war I'm here to keep that shit down. We'll sell our stuff those things. I like a lot. The problem is his Persona, which is what you know, these people very sick. You've been around very successful people. A lot of them are illiterate can't even write a fucking email but they are credibly wealthy and successful. Because they have you are excuse me.


You are instead of your That's an issue. So we're really smart. Yeah, just send you an e-mail. So these large cities credibly. Yeah or there with pi. So these people the elites of the world, which is really I don't know problem. Yeah. Yeah, they will tolerate a Donald Trump at their party because he's rich and he's important to them. But when it really comes down to it, he's not part of us. So that's the problem. This is you've seen this right, but it's not just Nature. Yes. I'm not saying it's not but let's not they do that was just recognize it and move on.


Let's just recognize really do that Adam Courage by doing this podcast Joe Rogan. We are the world. We are the children. We going to make that shit happen. We can help. Yeah, I think just by being men giving a male perspective doesn't matter. Which guest you you bring you bring yourself and that's important. That's why why are people attracted to you? Why besides you being very handsome? Why? Somewhere my wife shirt. Yeah, whatever stolen you got a beautiful family man. That's a good one. Bitch. I didn't say bitch. If I did she would know. I'm joking, of course she would. Dude, I think we're in a weird stage as human beings.


I really believe this and that we have this is this battles going on between people and all sorts of ideologies and perspectives and some of them are real valid right like police shooting people that shouldn't shoot real valid. And then you see videos of them not shooting white people. Maybe they should have shot. It's like you see those things like it what the fuck is going on. Especially if that's all you see if your if you're a young black man, you see all you see is videos of cop shooting black eyes and not shooting white guys. If someone just shows you three or four of those in a row and you have a job and a family you don't have time to be researching shit.


How do you know if that's representative of the whole world or not doesn't even even if it isn't representative isn't offencive as a singular event in the history of people where someone gets shot dress core because of what they look, Like right we all agree with of course, of course the problem with that more than anything is how it divides Us and how we look at each other. We're supposed to look each other as the same. We're supposed to look at it as just people and anything that takes us off that line whether it's male female gay straight black white. Yeah, privilege non-privileged. We had to let that go everybody has to stop themselves.


Can't think about how you're thinking? What is making you respond? What is it about you or your personal history that is making you respond in a very responsive reactive sometimes violent manner. It doesn't matter who you are. And we all have abuse. We have situations we have pain and this is being triggered every single day by very simple things that we can easily be triggered about because it's accepted but we have I have all kinds of issues that you can say something to me and it'll trigger me. I'm sure you have them too and only after you've been around. Home for a while. Like you know now we're half a century. We've seen some shit go down. Do you realize oh man, we should let these other people these younger people know that you know, you gotta look at yourself.


Why are you being triggered like this? Well, we also have to realize that we're in a biological Mosh Pit big time. It's a mosh pit. Yeah. It's not just in terms of our genes, but it's also our ideas. There's all this all this battle and going on and it's just how You know, I remember I watched this documentary on the Congo once and they they realized is a BBC documentary is amazing and they realized that certain spiders had form packs. Have you ever seen them? Yeah. Oh my god, dude. I fucking deer would run into this spider web and be like, what's that? Yeah, we can like so much we can learn so much from looking at our environment around us.


They figured out how to work together work together. Yeah compact. Yeah and I Like this is all Madness. So it's all battle for the top of the Heap. But I think it's important to restate that. We're all in our individual webs were in you know in the Instagram web in the Twitter web. There are other places where we spiders can come together with groups of other spiders and create our own web that grows and it sure it may be parlor and maybe parlor is bullshit. Maybe Mastodon is bullshit, but collectively it all. I mean, that's cool. This is a holy fire version of it all. This is the BBC Congo one where it's like a real musty lip and cobwebby looking web and they all work together and they Jack birds and shit.


Oh, yeah, I totally oh my God so we can do that too. And we what is the internet? It is a web. It is a web of web servers and computers and phones and watches and we can control a lot of it ourselves we can but this is I thought Adam Curry when I look at something like that. I'm like that's just what goes down if you let it if you let groups overcome we get together with well, I see the differently. Oh, no, I see us as Humanity being able to build a web collectively and in that we catch all the fuckers. Would that it were done with who've kept us apart. We can biters don't give a fuck who they catch. They catch birds bro Tweety Birds.


Well, maybe that isn't that socialism. They all catch one bird and they eat it. I don't think so. I think they just I think the each other eventually like Anyway L black widows. Anyway, they kill the male. This is many ways to connect an organized through the internet. It doesn't it doesn't have to be stupid things that are apps and bullshit. It just doesn't have to be that way and eventually someone's going to realize it'll become cool and become the internet of the internet and then people want to go there. That's how it works for sure. All I'm thinking is that There's a little bit more their job. There's a as some good stuff. It is right.


There's a way that we can look at all this in terms of like minimizing conflict as a priority and I don't think it's necessarily a garden Sleek, but minimizing conflict have to hurt each other. We don't yeah, that's what I'm saying. And there's something that we have to make an acknowledgement that we're all the same. They were on the same team and I don't think people feel like we are right now, I think this is how the right feels when you ban people even if they say ridiculous shit if it's ridiculous to you and I get it you you feel it's ridiculous good. Why do you want to protect other people from something that you immediately recognize is ridiculous. And that's the moment. We need to ask.


Why am I responding to this? Why do I need why do I feel the need to say that that's it has that but it's also the Deep concern that the people that are doing as they're going to affect people and change their perspective and make people Leave something that's not true and they will change the course of history or whatever. Okay. Well, that's just like fucking ridiculous. You got to stop that shit. It's not necessarily wrong though. Right? No work with Hitler. No, but but don't know you but the real answer is not stop that person. No really. She has come up with a much better idea. But oh yes a better about are you lazy fox? Exactly convince me with whatever you got you and there's a lot of that going on, but when we let ourselves be tied to some fucking Digital overlords will always be disappointed brings us back to things that were deleted from Facebook.


Yes, exactly. Come fuck that damn it. No right over to go through that as many different systems out there. You should be able to do that so easily it should be somehow or another voted upon like if well, how about who cares? How about how about just we have a place that we go that everyone just kind of pays for their little bit their little group and this exists has been around for 15 years people will come To get tired of this shit if all the opposition voices are gone. What are you going to do later called York tomorrow Adam Curry comes out of town - fuck, you know, it's this is whoa. I'm right. I'm right about this. I can see the writing on the wall.


You have a very strong opinion about something where you might be caressed jumping. I'm just yeah. Exactly. Correct. I might be wrong. I might be full of shit. Yeah, but good point heads. I'm jumping ahead. I can see where it has to go. Go Jack dorsey's him talking about decentralizing and perhaps federating different social networks. He understands people need to cut that dude some slack to Jack Dorsey is like we were so tribal God damn. It is very conflicted because he he can deal with his income his shareholders and board board members because he can't have conflict Beyond certain Realms which are determined by a certain group of ideas that just run certain shit.


He was a One of them all advertising. We're fucking a hole. You just paid a little bit of I'd pay for your show. Okay for your shower. I'm gonna be a surprise. I'm gonna I'm gonna pay for your show because I like your show is worth it to me. The only thing is if you would ask me how much I would have paid you much more than it's actually going to cost me to Spotify. But that's that's up to you my brother. I love you. I love you when I see someone like like whether it's Jack Dorsey or even Zuckerberg. Anybody's put into a position that no human being has been responsible for possible. They've never been responsible for media Empires that connect uncountable and she counted people and shame on us for expecting anything interesting or Innovative out of that whole group including the Congress shame on us.


We created the shit. We knew what's going on. We dictate what's going on, but no right. We're just following along. Whatever. Fuck it. We have so much power. It's fucking crazy. How many people are on Facebook? I'm not on Facebook feeling really a couple of billion couple billion Jesus Jamie who knows a billion was it be? Okay seems normal. Well give that dude looks like an alien all the money then seriously. Whoo. No, it's really okay. Yeah and a lot of cash kids. Yeah respect incredible amount of money, but 2.0 just 2.6 billion a month 1.73 a day.


Yeah. Oh my God, if you just zoom out. Oh my God, put that back up. Oh my God. Oh my God. That's insane. Holy shit. Yeah. That's close to what 1/3 of the humans. So, you know doesn't know Facebook take away Nordic folk bass note internet created. And a beautiful beautiful advertising machine and I give a thousand percent credit to Zuckerberg his vision and whoever else is work with him.


It is such a beautiful mechanism for micro-targeting. He has delivered on a lot of the promise that we were all looking at like you'll be able to get there and I'm could have been complicit in that the right ad to the right person just the right moment. Just when he's scratching his nuts wants to buy the car. Will know it all when you give it to you and he has delivered largely on that promise. Unfortunately with age and wisdom. I've come to realize that was a very bad thing dog to want the very fucking bad thing to want. The real concern is that gets connected to a I of course and then it's already it's already happening and AI is being skewed and so many interesting ways for a while if you typed in American inventor, you would get all black inventors black color.


Skin, I don't know if they were laid off or not. So that's it. That's an overcompensation of the algorithm for some reason. So these things are happening and is all it's the things. I believe all people like you all people are good. They want to do good the convinced that they have to do this like you have to say I'm a racist to be good, please think about what you're doing. Could you imagine if he'll is reaching some connection between virtual reality and artificial intelligence? Agents where they trick you. The trick you into living in a world with no pain. I can convey trick you into living in a world with no conflict.


No advancement. No improvement what we are we are right now for all of eternity, but that's actually how are you there a slow trickle? Are you there Joe right now? No, I'm great. But are you gonna go there? No, okay, dude, we can we can do better but the idea that this is a slow trickle where there's no risk ever. Yeah. I think you have to take risks. I think it's a big factor in Phoenix. That's yes, and that is it you need some this is why many many very successful people where the business or academics? Yeah, but certainly royalty. They all develop a super specialty and they can do some study algebra some you know, others will study economics and we become very successful because they need that challenge as all human beings.


We need a challenge a real challenge in Life. Yeah, no need to be our full self. I think we did too. I think I think we need to challenge and also all other aspects of our life in terms of like what we believe in and I think the problem is that if you believe one thing and I believe in opposing thing we have to be violently opposed to each other. I think the problem is that people become to married to our to their ideas and if we could just avoid that, but if we could just talk to people look at this example you and I did. Do not are not on the same page on a lot of things. Like what do we not on the same page of know? I think I'm much more but you know, we joke around conspiracy theory whatever but I'm pretty serious about a lot of things I said, but you respect me for it.


I'm saying it and even if you haven't figured it out or don't like it or whatever. It doesn't matter. He's like, okay. Well I did you registered it 100% don't disagree with you know, but you know I'm saying but but my thought it's my all my thoughts on conspiracies are from ignorance. So of course and you Say something like I'm just thinking I'm just yeah, maybe that's the beauty of it, but I'm not married to it. So but in the past when I was younger, I would have been it would have been married or something like that. So just as you can get really married to a dumb idea you can get married to fuck your dumb ideas. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes so short stop calling it something and labeling someone to conspiracy clears your things on fire and throwing them into a little Lobby of an apartment complex filled with people.


That's this is a Terrible uneffective message. It's not how we want people to behave when it's not punished. It's a very bad message. What's also a terrible call for escalation? Because if you'll you kill people with fire, then we come back with guns and kill you. We've not start towards bananas like kids if you feel like you haven't been represented. There's other ways to get the message out as frustrating as it may seem so I do not fulfill these I do not forget the black Bloc and antifa is completely separate from On black lives matter yes protests and I don't and I don't agree with pulling down statues without debate or discussion. But the black Bloc which is really whenever you see the helmet the backpack the black outfit.


That's probably not your average run-of-the-mill protester. We in an Avengers movie. Possibly in a way to think that the think that it's not possible is ridiculous during our elements who were and I think it's kind of now being admitted everywhere. Even Joe Biden is now because it's bad for him in the polling is coming out and saying okay. These are agitators. Yeah. Fuck. Yeah, they are and this is being downplayed not being shown to you because you need that. And by the way when you have in race riots, you have different levels. So you have the protesters protesters fine, then you get that. To taters and agitators are start to break shit. Then you get the guys with the umbrellas and they start to break Windows showing you where the third wave which is truly the poor poor poorest of society.


They come in to go grab stuff. Why do they grab stuff? Because they've seen everybody is grabbing something for themselves. They've seen it all the politicians are not stupid. They seen the politicians. They've seen the Hollywood this in everybody steal steal steal the The agitators the people with the Hammers in The Umbrellas they say there you go these people go in and they get what they feel is their that's part of their American Dream at this point. So we have to recognize what's happening and then take it away from just black or white racial issues. This is people fucking with us fucking with us because of our history and it's triggering a lot of deep emotional shit and it's really evil to exploit that and I think we can we need to go to therapy.


We need to go to therapy as a country. I think this is like a plan to fuck with us, I believe so. Yeah by who well, it could be China. It could be just globalist. It could be Russia. It doesn't matter it. This is we do the same to other countries, right? We're exporting to how many times we said. We're bringing democracy to you Middle East. Come on man. Come on, man. I didn't Joe Biden. Look, here's the deal. Come on, man. You lying two-faced pony soldier. That's a great phrase though. What come on man? Who faced pony soldier. I've never heard it before the guys. Guys, he's a Savage. You got that out. Papa's dead. He's not a Savage that that guy's is a problem.


It's really interesting. It's like if the world was a simulation this would be a fantastic moment where you had to decide like how Preposterous are you going to let it get like I got this we're sitting around that we got the game undercut age. I got it. What do this dude against this dude. Imagine if you are. Charge of a sleep Samia a dream simulation. Yeah, and you are on the outside you you Adam Curry fucking kitchen gloves. Yeah, the whole deal working all the chords and you had like, okay, we got to bring this guy out. Like let's let's let's let's like let's do that. Hey, I'm just live it happens. Let's let things get more and more. Our posture is to the point where he's willing to come out of this programming and be awake again, but you've been in a simulation this entire time.


Yeah, and who says that you and I right now this conversation. Not a part of the new the manipulation of that exact simulation. That's what my concern is because I know personally that's hard. If I wasn't me I would assume that someone is telling me what to do, but I'm telling you no one's telling me what to do. That's the weirdest part about it you have synchronicity and it happens it falls into place for you, right? Maybe maybe I'm telling you what you can't do. You can't commit crimes. No, no, don't be mean to your life in general every move seems to kind of fall into place for you. A lot of fun doing bad things if you think it's better if a bad thing happens, generally it's because I'm I did something like I thought wrong or I said the wrong thing right II moved to the wrong direction that I had a recognized why I moved him all those things and you know, and you have a bad set like a bad sense stand up the best example, I can only imagine how horrifying sometimes you come out with a new job consists raw.


It doesn't work right and you like you like I just open with this and like maybe have one too many Jack Daniels in the back and you get a little teary quite didn't quite handle it right you feel like you're just going to get on stage and take over Adam Curry, but the joke does not come out exactly how you want it to because it's fresh and like jokes like a stand-up joke is sort of like a thing that you have an intention and then this is the result and people often times. They misconstrue the Result with your intention like if you bomb like this motherfucker, what did I hurt my feelings? He went to make me feel bad, but right terrible comedy the exact opposite of what not to mention.


He just right just right. It's the literal like the artistic which was crashing on a surfboard now with the edges is on something that should be offensive, but somehow you laugh about it sort of. Yeah, but it's also it's like what your ideas are and stand of a representative of what what you Actually feel as a person like can you make a controversial ideas something palatable? Yeah. Can you make it palatable that seems to be what it is. So what you're doing if we just take it back to the simulation you're debugging your own program. That is the definition of AI that you are artificial intelligent you this is the to me. This is the big joke. We are the artificial intelligence and these guys are just like pretending that they got something that's a way to look at it.


Here's my way to look at it. I don't think we've been talking that long. No, no. No, we're talking about 40,000 years man if that yeah, I don't think it's been that long. I don't think we're that good. My mom my mom my mom died 15 years ago. My mom used to tell me I said, you know how they came up with the with the name brush for hairbrush. I say no. I see go with a dude. Yeah. This is fucking thing was a anywhere like this bra. Really? No, of course. That's what she really said, but obviously is bullshit but it's just like yeah, man, that really made me realize that we really haven't been there that long, you know, some fucking caveman just came up with a brush. Well the human being a little bit this form of human is only been around for what a little bit half a million years.


Yeah, whatever that the bass right? Yeah. Is it? What's the threshold Jamie? It's like an estimate. I think it's between 250 and 500 thousand years ago Homo sapiens emerged somewhere. That's nothing. That's so little yeah, it's so little. Yeah, I don't know if you remember but you were saying something with Duncan that was you were talking about us actually being the spaceship and that we are hurtling through the universe at the end amazing speed and all the and everything's whipping by yeah, and I love that because you really when you zoom out of reality and it's all given. Yeah. We're on the Earth was round or whatever.


The fuck is flat doesn't matter. Thing in space with this round or flat is in space were flying. We're moving were doing stuff that realization or just thinking about that in general. Just people just talking about Mom and we're in space. Look at the sky. Look at the stars. What does it mean? It's a coward's perspectives. Just look at the Tree Tops. Yeah. Yeah really is. Yeah. There's something about is why marijuana is something I think so boys. That's what I'm talking about. I'm talking about that shit. Yeah. Come on Governor get on board. Abital get there a 'but. I love you. Yeah. Well, we'll see don't get so don't get too easy with your vote their eye Joe Rogan your smile your endorsements going to mean a lot in the Drone Star State.


I'm your friend and I'm wearing my wife shirt this right you are appropriate. Listen, it's not bad make some money off this shit. Stop. Stop playing games not killing anybody. Listen if Texas is a place we can own a fucking tiger you had a bit in my back to the Texas raised. This is a fact This is 100% fact. There's more tigers in captivity and taxes then all of the wild of the world is more tigers and dudes backyards. I know yeah, but you can't have we'd really are we really being responsible here. You'll learn that you'll learn that this codes in Texas.


It's easy to own a tiger the dog that's been labeled as dangerous is estimated. You being from 2,000 and 5,000 Tigers living is that's so funny. 5,000 Tigers is a heard my but as you saw soft 5,000 Tigers coming over the hill you like there's gonna be nothing left of me and seconds my buddy. Gene has huge snakes in his in his apartment. But yeah, he has a you have a baby. No, it's just him. Yes, but the one is 16 feet long. Have you heard those stories? Great, I think and he great. Oh, yeah their names. Yeah. And the other words, I think it's a 16 16 by things like 15 or 16.


It's incredible and it's really it's very interesting to see that they have an interesting life these snakes. Yeah, you know what that is for me that's like holding 280 pound dumbbells and trying to keep your face above water. Yeah, how long you do this before those things? Eat you no. No, not a 16 foot snake in your house, son. No now these it's I think he's a boa constrictor so he only You know, but he goes into the bathtub when he's when he feels his full time for a bath. He's sleeping, but they sleep most of the time. Yeah, it's a trip though, because you know going like yeah. Alright, let me say hi to the snakes because like his family. I was watching video today of a guy who's fishing in Australia.


I don't know if it's a guy or girl but they caught a big fish and there is like the dangers of fishing in Australia. And as this tire is reeling this fish in a crocodile come swimming out of the water and steals his fish. Fish and they're running away from this crocodile dude crocodiles are so scary. They happen here. They have me to we have alligator alligator alligator. And yeah, it allows those in America. Listen if we had crocodiles here America the way they have them in Australia, we would kill them all really fuck you have been Australia. No I have yeah, I have I would end up never seen those Crocs in 1990. I went through that. I did a documentary and went into the Outback and just learn so much and I don't even recognize it was rude caught up.


S and the crocodile comes in Jack's it. Holy shit. Oh, yeah, right son give up the fish. So I bet they probably wait done. Look at that your face, bitch. That's a huge fish tank Dragon. I just swallows it that crocodiles are so spooky man. They're so big. Look at that thing. It's a monster that lives in the jungle. We got to shout out to everybody down under everybody in Victoria in Melbourne who are being locked down like four lockdown bands that felt like fucking rash out out there. They're cut us out of green tree there. They're getting screwed the other plane the same damn script down there only six months later. It's crazy.


Well the And probably protect people and keep their hospital beds. Yeah, that's all we flatten the curve. Yeah, and probably try and do a lot of those things but it just seems like no one's doing it. Right. It seems like not this is no country that prepared properly and know it's almost like who the fuck's all this coming? Whoo. No one did you know and there was a pandemic Department that we had here that was shut down by Trump, when well, yes, but that was transferred into a by her into it. Yes. So not necessarily shutdown shutdown, it became a biological weapons group. Yes, which has the same function as a flu. So that is a little different than the than the story wait a minute explain that so the pandemic response group.


That was within I believe in National Security Council. This is the one that Trump was accused of this man though. He did this mantel is he dismantled it and took it was only two people or three people and took the resource. Yeah. It's in the National Security. Counsel, so, you know it's a it's a real responsibility, but they transferred that into a biological weapons program to be on the lookout for that which has the same characteristics as what happened. Either way doesn't seem like it worked very well other than the president shutting down some travel or most travel from China and Europe in the UK against everyone else's wishes that part I think he did well, but I don't know.


Know how well this biological warfare outfit worked because if anything the tests were either sabotage door sucked or the CDC is inefficient ineffective. I don't know but we got that too late and what we got the PCR test that spin up the DNA samples 37 to 40 times instead of 30 is producing results that are could be a lot of 3035 percent false positive. So we don't have any data to work with you're fucked. You're fucked we have We don't have the data 35 percent false positive 30 percent 30 percent false positives this in the New York Times just last week and so, you know, just to make sure that this even the New York Times is full of shit.


I think when we publish something good. Yeah, it should be noted but isn't also that one of those things where they don't know how effective it's they have to implement something they find out how it's affected by looking at all the data that they are what's effective like what when you take her test when the first look when covid-19 this is Norwich is known testing policy. Normally you spin it up 30% for a PCR test, but when covid-19 emerged yeah was when was the first test? Well, the first ones were bogus and some of the CDC test actually contains some of the viruses those fucking crazy. I was was it was a huge ba chest containing.


Yes. Yeah the huge botch. It's not all of them, but it got fucked up and that's when Trump said President Trump said Okay, we're now doing the Abbot system. You get all the commercial labs and you got all that going because they were just failing they were just failing now, but what then happened I'm not so sure that that's honest because there's a lot of incentive in the pharmaceutical and medical system to skew things a certain way to make sure you get paid and you can't deny that's taking place to store agree. So yeah some of it happening and the main way to make sure we had a lot of positives instead of 30 times. The amplification of the the fragments of the virus that you're looking for.


They did a 37 to 40 times and that gives you a lot more at least it's known science. It's just not told. Well, one of the big complaints recently wasn't that the tests are too accurate where they're accurate in a sense that their their labeling people as positive that are no longer contagious. Too sensitive rather than accurate. Yes. That's exactly that's exactly what right so people are getting a false positive. So they're not contagious nothing at all. It's just it's just you have so in order to test positive. You have to have a certain if you're going to get symptoms if there's a certain amount of viral load, so you have to have more than just a little bit, you know, if you had it just talking here.


I might not get it. But you know, we're making out slowly Jesus swapping spit and hundred time with each other. I might get enough time using Louis. We don't yeah, totally. 70s porn music I thought it was David Bowie had already killed David Bowie. All right, I'll do it. Whatever whatever turns you on there's a stall man waiting of you. My child will be horrified when she like that. Seriously, you need to back off on that shit, right goddamn song though. Hmm. So yeah, the we don't have any real data anymore. I think well, I think here's the thing. We want someone to be in charge when everyone is trying to figure it out in real time, but the nature of our entire system is not someone's in Jarred.


The president can't say shut it down. He just can't say that that has to come from the governor's and then you know here in Austin we have different rules that the governor has allowed, but you don't have to have them so they're not mandated. So that system goes back up the line and in Austin, you know, this is what I don't like we were told again Mass Social distance close the bars. Etc once were into the next phase which is instead of 40 hospitalizations per day an average of 22, then we go to the next phase and then we're allowed to open up some more but there was like nah now we're going to wait until September 8th because schools are open and we don't want to jeopardize that but that when you do that to Americans that is fucked and there there miss judging how Americans take that shit you give us a goal.


Joe will go like we all will go. Any color Creed background? Fuck? Yeah, when you do it when you get this fucking go flatten the goddamn curve. We're going bitch. So we do bra hoo-hah, hoo-hah, right Semper Fi we go. We all go where we go. One we go, right we go all and then they say, okay great job, but now we're going to take another couple weeks. We have to meet you right next goal. That's not we go. What the fuck? Right. Yeah, that's what's happening. And and this is the danger because it could just be ugly just be ugly but something will have to happen one way or the other injure is not letting the actual interaction take place.


The real danger is in silencing opposing opinions court because I feel like when you're doing that if you have a platform whether it's like Facebook YouTube or Twitter or anything if you have a platform. And in that platform some people believe XY others believe why have you just decide to shut down everyone that believes why you create a tyranny you you have a tyranny of ideology, but you have to believe especially if it's connected to the economy like it is Hollywood and it's one of the things that I expect. I didn't accelerated person wasn't wasn't a victim of it by any stretch but I had friends that were they would have this perspective that they knew they had to have if they The meeting they were trapped.


Otherwise, they would have aluminum. Yes. Otherwise, they wouldn't have get the gigs man. I don't even think it was the fault of the people that were enforcing. It. Krishna is a natural scenario where human beings one more time. So I'll write something brother the real part feather real one to the real Joe Rogan Experience, Jamie. Jim he's asleep big fucking part of this thing. He's been he's been here all day. I love the Jamie's. I think he's like a hot property now in Austin hot properties like the it's like what is motherfuckers here alone? Yeah singing single dangerous bitches headed your way son. This guy. How old is he? He's young right 12. Look at them as 52525.


Yeah. Yeah bad. He's been getting DNA shots every day. I've known him. He is once the NASA people. Aren't you know as if once why I had a reverse my stance on the moon landing and then the C.I.A. People took over Jamie started getting shots. Oh, yes that I do you are focused on say no but he's like the nerdy type its name is already got a neuro-link ask him. Oh my God. Yeah. He got it. Fuck those pigs Grammys. The that was tell you that was kind of weird man with the pig the pig demo Mike you are man. I liked it because he always just haven't even watched that my did working with monkeys I could And Tina's like what the fuck you actually watch Tommy's on month with pigs what's going on when you can turn a raccoon that Guardians of the Galaxy character come to me then I love the idea.


I love the idea. I would love to try the interface instead of the keyboard, you know just be able to think it and make it go away. I love to get the analysis power of the computer, but I would like to be able to turn it off have two concerns. I would like one. I don't want to be an Adopter but to if you're not an early adopter, what if those motherfuckers just take off and control everything nah, dude alumni talking about out that simple its core take you more than just the first generation of early adopters, but I would say getting early get in early as what I'd say. He was saying that might have a massive increase in their productivity, of course, but in that would be a huge Advance, you know what I really isn't, you know, what's really fascinating and this does play into this.


Most companies who have had people working from home have now cut 40% of their real estate portfolio. This is going to continue forever the remaining 60% of their real estate portfolio offices. They've increased the Doma cubicles. It's you know, Executive offices meeting rooms conference rooms. Everyone else is going to be working from home and the productivity almost across the board from what I understand from my friends. In it integration is up significantly because people now know that they're at home used to be if you were working on the road.


If someone heard a bird tweeting in the background you'd be busted like you fuck are you not in the office, but now it's accepted and so people are working from anywhere and everywhere and companies have fucking love and call people out on bird sounds in the back back in the day. Oh, yeah, you got a conference call who the fuck put it on mute, bitch you walking through the city. Or in Macy's I hear you. Oh, yeah, all that shit. I had that to remote work. It seems like he's done is done is done is done so live where you work work where you live what happens to like the cultures of the created by big businesses all working together the whole time the whole world is changing Joe Rogan. I know but it has taken place man. This is why your young people that in view for us.


You keep bringing all the crazy stalkers that shit on me. You have a huge responsibility. You're not evil on me. You're in Texas now, this is Legends of board Joe Rogan, but I mean, do you think a lot of what we're talking about here? Whether it's a conspiracy or just or just the way things happen when systems conflict with each other and one gains control and the opposing forces move in and take more control like it so it's always been that came in 2000 2006. I was living in London and I got an invitation from the Queen of England damn son, and it was she was relaunching the royal website and I was Dated to come and be a part of that and they pick me up in a car in a Mercedes interestingly enough.


I was hoping to be a character have been a Rolls, but you know the front gate Buckingham Palace took me right through the fucking front gate opened up I went in there. Was in this waiting room with about a hundred other people and there was you know art, I'd never seen Rembrandt's Van Gogh's. I've never seen those before and then the whole ceremony and the just shake her hand, you know, you go down the line. It seems to Adam cry and I looked her straight in the eye. Everyone's bow him. Like let me look in there what I see and I saw nothing man for there's enough yet wizard, but the fact is that if we still are willing to believe that we need this tradition of this old lady with funny hats. You can some prime fucking ass real estate in the middle of London.


We got a lot of thinking to do but we don't we got a lot of fucking Americans goddamn it. We're here in Texas. I don't know what you're talking about with England. That's right. This is the People's Republic of Texas and it stands on its own. We love our neighbors the Queen's they go fuck themselves. No, no. No, we're very we're a very welcoming people. This is where we underestimated here in Texas. We're good people. No, I agree. Good people. The queen thing is ridiculous. I'm sure she's great but first is an Isis. I grew up in the NBA that she's the queen. I had I had lunch with the king and queen of the Netherlands a year and a half ago. It's fucking ridiculous. It's outrageous how just like, how did you get here? This were born in the right spot?


Right? But why do same thinking that people still want them involving? They're putting their political everyday life because we're still kind of literature in this caste system in this system. Let me ask you this and that's where we're at. You're a person who understands. Blockchain and the idea of Bitcoin a lot of what we're trying to do but people are trying to do with try new ways to run the world. Think about. Is there a way of running a decentralized government. Is that possible? What is our problem that we look at government? Like you have to elect these people and they have ultimate control. Here's one of the more ridiculous ones with your bipartisan whether you're whether whether you're a staunch Republican staunch Democrat, please hold on for a second.


And why is it okay, if you get elected president, you can pardon people like is the laws of law or is it not the law but you have a fucking get-out-of-jail-free pass. Yeah, you have a get-out-of-jail-free pass. Yeah, that's one of those that's what millions of dollars. Yeah. I did all kinds of crazy shit. Yeah, you can just swoop. That's one of those that's one of those there's a couple things you can do as a present including appointing Supreme Court Justices. This is kind of at the core of solidifying At that executive branch. They needed some power. That's weird Congress House of Representatives. They get the purse. They get the money. Yeah said it's good tenant gets to be just cigar Smokin douchebag.


You're like fuck around all the time like whatever but they have they make it happen. These are the back room Cigar smoking deals and then we have the executive branch who needs it, you know, they need to have some power and so their power because of course if Supreme Court for us is like the Supreme Court said it man, that's the end of the fucking line was He is not. That's why we let the president appoint the Supreme Court and and federal judges. Isn't that weird though? The president has a four-year term. Yeah, but they can't they can appoint someone who's there for Life only. Well, they all of their all appointed for Life only if someone dies or leaves so it's not every president gets this President Trump got some major fucking break here.


You know, he got to maybe a third party time maybe a fourth depending, you know, and I wish no ill on anyone but RBG You know, she's on the ropes. It seems she seems to be bulletproof. I don't know and I like her she's she is I don't agree with a lot of her decisions, but she is an American success story. If you know her story about Ruth Bader Ginsburg, that's a very very powerful woman who really is impossible to pee again. Fuck you Jimmy pause and tell me the Ruth Bader Ginsburg story. Are we the is this the first time you Joe Rogan has a to pit stops on the show. Yeah, I think so.


That's probably the first time right two of them three hours. I'm out of shape. I took a whole week off. He'll move set up the spot. My bladder shrunk back down to normal size. My bladder was very impressive at one point Tom. I can go like four or five hours even know piantas strong stay strong, but eventually it's shrunk back down to how can we support you moving here to Austin Marty a bitch are you talking about? I don't know what to help ya wonder. What can we do for you? What can what do you need man? What can we? Okay, make me fear for your life. What's already done every day my goal as a person and this is a this is something I've been thinking about a lot lately because I have had a hard time coming to grips with this idea that people are listening to what I think.


I'm not an expert in anything. But I've come to the conclusion through all the trials and errors and pros and cons of my life that if we just go into things with the intention of working things out. Doubt not of fighting not of conflict. It's possible that all the excess energy that we have that are that's dedicated to these unnecessary conflicts that maybe we can come to a comfortable agreement for both parties. We're fucking that up because of his ancient DNA that we have that leads us to always want to go to war with opposing tribes.


I feel in myself. I felt in myself when I was younger I've of I fought against it. I've analyzed it. I've been confused by humiliated by it. It's a part of being a person and it's a very strong motivation and I've mocked it in many times even in sure in pro and con jasta. I understand what it is. I get it. There's a thing that we all have we want to be loved and accepted by a group of our peers and our community, but that that that leading to the doing that out of fear. It leads to a lack of You're thinking which leads to ideologies which is why we have Cults. It's for this truth. No really is true in the in the late.


Probably 80 81 was quite young but I wound up in Los Angeles and I was trying to have some meetings trying to figure out if I could be somewhere in Hollywood or something. It was like a total Lark and I had one or two phone numbers from I think the backup singer or maybe remember there was Janet Jackson. What have you done for me lately? Yeah. There was an answer record to that. It was an answer record. He's what I've done for you lately bitch. It was kind of one of those deals. I don't listen to those because those are negative. Well well but back in this time, so I wound up in probably Compton area and it was a it may I don't know what radio station it was but it was probably wouldn't have KLX or the equivalent of New York BLS and there were these guys doing rap battles and they would and so it kind of Trance.


Formed from gangs to rapping that's how how hip-hop really got started, you know, you're battling against him and he had to break dance battles all the different. It was pure tribes against each other maybe today's version instead of bullshitting each other on some fucking piss exactly. Oh my God, I totally did. Discredited my whole argument you really rude once people see the shoulder pads like Curry's full of shit. Shut up man that period so there's a Nazi spoken.


Maybe we should all just be doing podcast everybody get a fucking podcast together work it out yell at somebody over some kind of Skype connection. Not the worst idea. It just get started get started get started honestly believe that we should come up with some sort of an agreement for how we communicate don't be assholes. Yeah. By Example The the only way by example just that alone will shift so many things into the proper. Yeah proper position. I mean by example, I really think the example just be an example. That's all it is. I think we also have to acknowledge that people fucking change and grow over time. And no do we ever we if we want people to get better we have to assume and we have to acknowledge that whoever they are today is not who they were yesterday.


There's a lot of people that are Like I see it a lot with either alcoholics or drug addicts or people just dismiss them and the guys fucking guy. He's just you know, he had that thing with Oxys. He's always going to be that right. No, are you fucking people can absolutely sure they can change. Yeah, if they decide they can change and they go on to become amazing people that there's a grip that anything can get on you whether it's opiates or Coke or whatever the fuck it is, but there's there's some things that become you. There are you did the your new the neutral ovaries is woven built on that. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, no, but yeah, but I mean involved get involved.


Yeah. Okay. It's marijuana that is in that is throughout my entire system. My being is how I let's just say it matter of life. We both love it animated. Thank God for trailers. I've never done that but I think that's all that's it. Keep that's really all it takes and and people have to at least and this is the big problem not be afraid. To say what you think and think about how you say it's try and say something nicely but don't be afraid of using something that is politically not right or it could be a pro or the term problematic is bullshit by itself. Either to problem is not a problem. I think we have this undeniable inclination to form groups and formed through that's okay people that think along our lines and then everybody who opposes those thoughts we close ourselves off to their perspective.


We fight against them. It's just it's a Natural thing that people do and it's it's one of the reasons why we have so many problems with all kinds of different ideas is that people whether you have this idea when you've made a decision on a controversial issue in your mind most of the time what you're basing your decision is on your own perspective your education how well that lets us be the give the best of possible results. And saying you're looking at any problem as he you're going to look at it objectively and come up with your own perspective. But your perspective is going to be different than someone who grew up in Miami, which is going to be different than someone who came from another country.


Everyone's going to have their own like thank you. This is the core of America by the way. Yeah just tie into that my friend Moe. He was born and grew up in North Carolina lives in Virginia. He's a doll sweet. We've never met each other. I'd never even seen him doesn't matter but one day I'm gonna hang out with Moe and I'm going to eat whatever the fuck. Like most family eats. I'm going to hang out with his children and talked away the about things they're interested in he's gonna come and his wife will come and visit us and he'll see art side in our culture and it's beautiful because you can enjoy it with each other and still be different. We don't have to be forced into this one. It's all the same thing. I don't believe in that stuff. That's not fun. That's not fun. But that doesn't have to be all the same thing.


You know, I mean the idea of like just people yeah just people doesn't mean it's all the same. No, it means we have to we're all just people but there's this people that live like this and these people that live over here and there's a different climate there and this place is really cold. I get the idea that's not where some forces want us to go. What is that though? That's just people jockeying for control. Look it should we concentrate on them or thinking you really concentrate on what we actually think about these things? Well, I think what we all think about that when I talk to rational people, what do they think about these things the kind of thing when I just had like just People just people yeah, this good bat smart different interests.


Everybody's different. Yeah people who don't read who say brilliant shit. Yes people who you know, I can't see and they can play guitar. Yeah, this is but isn't that all basically coming from a place of fear either not fitting in or not being understood or not understanding and just being afraid of what that means and I think that's fueled by a lot of things around us, which is Afraid it's fear. It's always fears the great mechanism this always a lot of fear. And I think that that fear encourages people to engage in group think and it discourages them from coming up with a contradictory opinion.


If there's a narrative that all the really aggressive people whether it's right-wing or left-wing there's a narrative that they're espousing like it's there's a gravity to that you want to you want to tell people. I'm in man. Yeah, we need to do that locked in borders. Down. Oh, yeah, we need to do that and like Eat the Rich like whatever it is one side of the other is a draw to that. Just what we need to learn. What we need to learn is not to immediately say you're wrong and I hate you because of it. That's because once we admit that we do everything we just talked about. I don't know if I'm fucking right just my opinion would you say is your opinions and we could be wrong so you just have to recognize that and I don't under what I don't understand that's part of the mechanism some Is this it may be triggered by black and white checkered boxes may be triggered by somewhere over the rainbow.


I don't know what's going on. But for some reason we're being triggered into hating someone to different idea and that's the one that is actually fuck that exactly. That's Processor. Have you ever seen the documentary that was on the debates between Gore Vidal and oh, yeah, this is while back where 1960s Was it call God? Damn it? What the fuck's the British gentleman's name here. It is best if enemies that's what it is. Yes, it's Gore Vidal Who is the very famous? I'm high as fuck right now. I can't remember. That's right Buckley William F. But how about this? Well, there was a really fascinating moment where William F Buckley got upset at him threatened to punch him and shit Trenton hit him like oh, yeah, that's yes, but this is It's again, it's this if I think I'm right.


And I think you're wrong and I want to prove that. I'm right and you're wrong. It becomes a it comes a game of tennis if he comes wrestling. Yeah, it becomes a contest and any contest to people engage in if you like, there's all sorts of factors that come into play like the Mongols didn't conquer like a quarter of the world because their ideology is right. They just they had the right factors in place that allow them to do that elephants all kinds of shit. So, if someone has If someone has a control of a situation doesn't necessarily mean that they should.


William F. Buckley, son William F Buckley Jr. Was one of the founders of the conservative America his son Christopher was married to my cousin Lucy and this is damn dude. Oh, yeah, my whole family is all kinds of government shit laser people right? Come on, son. No, no, no. Maybe maybe my Uncle Don is is incredible. He was he was very high in the CIA. He became Bush senior's National Security advisor. So basically like the Michael Flynn or the Condoleezza Rice or they Frisk you at Thanksgiving.


Well, it's very interesting because I've never been cleared. I've no clearance and so at some family gathering some of the other cousins of cousins. I don't really You know that well, like well, we can't talk about this because you don't have clearance and like or excuse me. Yeah. Yeah, but that's that's that's really if you look at the No Agenda show. That's really it's been a truth-seeking of my own life because when I was in my teens my parents they both told me that they had been involved in there were I guess the call Civilians in the state department and that's why we had lived in Uganda when I was very young and I think that's why probably moved to Europe and there's a lot of people who are my whole family is definitely Patriots it on a lot of weird things have been involved in weird shit everything from well.


My my paternal grandfather was in the lieutenant commander in the Pacific Japanese theater my maternal grandfather Albert show. Will he actually was German but he landed at Normandy. He was in fucking D-Day. Oh, yeah purple heart and all the shit for it. Everybody was kind of involved. We got all kinds of you know, it's very painful talking about I've talked to all of them and I've actually talked it's funny enough. I've my uncle had much deeper conversations with and he's close to 90 now. So he's he's kind of done. I mean, he's he I hope he stays around for a long fucking He and his wife he was Ambassador to South Korea.


I mean, this is a major dude, and I believe he recruited my parents. Both of them are gone so I can talk about it. I can't say exactly what they were were doing. But I do know one thing is that and this is why I think when I once I realized this I have just trust of the media is that I believe my father was in Uganda to report on certain events that were taking place. This is before Idi Amin. In came in well a boat a was still president and I think the the US control devotee. I'm not sure if they controlled Idi Amin, but he would write a story about something happening there and it may not have been exactly what the story was but it was a pro America or Pro America agenda story and because it was in the I don't know what's called the fucking Uganda times the New York Times And The Washington Post could say according to the Uganda times.


This is what's happening. So that story became truth. But that story was actually a message a message from United States intelligence or the president or whatever or the state department. Whatever our democracy idea was whatever. I fucking agenda was and when they told me it was really telling me like, you know, we're not in this anymore. We're not doing any of that and you know, we're legit but it opened my eyes to having lived this huge lie. Not that I knew it, but you know, why did my dad Come home one day and he was able to speak French fluently. Like what the fuck? I remember some of that tell me whatever you want.


That's a cool language. Hey, bro. No. No, it's not. Well it is actually but so that kind of stuff was was kind of mind-blowing and it really reset my thinking and I have a really don't know much both. My parents passed my dad passed last year. He was 80. He was last several years of his life were no the thinking was really not that There anymore just kind of went downhill and we never really had it. He was gone a lot, you know, and I don't blame him because he did what he had to do and I think all my family a very patriotic no matter what they were involved in think it came from a good place. And so I've kind of become this this counterweight to all of that in some odd way and but I know that a lot of stuff is bullshit and I know because I feel that my immediate family was involved in some of the creation of that may be a long time ago, but I don't think got any better.


Yeah, I think everything evolves right and if people are pulling the wool over people's eyes in the 1960s. I think it's only gotten much much much much much much much better out of yeah, the internet has been a blessing and a curse at the same time. It's always how it's going to be with everything in life. There's long as we realize it as long as we can think to have it in the back of your mind. This could this could be bullshit just have that in the back your mind. It's it's always a possibility with all these systems if you're looking at it. Without any connection to who's right and who's wrong? You just look at it like this little like a battle of like bugs battling it out. Look at it in terms of like what are the qualities of each side?


And what should other source? Yeah consider the source, but also but also come out and walk in nature. Yes connects turn off the phone leave it at home. You just disconnect. It's important for your immune system. Yeah. I really believe that I think so leave that shit at home go without it. It make love. I know it sounds nutty but make make a fucking love. Is that a Bad Company song feel like bacon? Hello. We're from the 80s. Yeah, of course. It is. Fuck. Yeah. Hell yeah. Any any sex on will do any sex or any sex song will do man? Yeah, man.


So we remember was this song about the kid like a shooting star everybody thought they were that kid when I was in high school. China school board when he heard his first Beatles song fuck is that I grew up. I was in Holland. I don't I think I missed that one. We don't last long. Is that Bad Company Shooting Star? It's a song about a rock star. He was just like I feel is that amazing rock star who dies young? I had a certain set of stuff in Europe growing up around the same time because I was really there from 7:00 on through teenage years. There it is. So I had a lot of Bad Company sec. That is right. Shoot a 1975.


There was something about a lot of that music that got discredited because it wasn't as complex as like maybe the who were Rolling Stones or Zeppelin. There was this, um, some music just didn't get the credit. It deserves. You know, Billy Squier. Remember Billy Squier course Molly is the night, of course all of that. Yeah. There's a lot of stuff that happened in South Jersey to lot of Southside Johnny. So also Skid row mean those guys. Yeah. I love those guys people loved or hate Bruce Springsteen. I will love him forever just because but I don't really see eye-to-eye with him on a lot of stuff anymore, but after but his songs like like Captain Jack is one of my all-time favorite songs to me.


It's the river. That's great time to know about brilliant disguise. Well, that was when I was just starting in television in Europe and had that easy. Did you baby just and that was the really kind of he had these kind of Soft cool videos. Yeah what he had fire baby. I'm on fire. Yeah, really your daddy home. You were feeling that shit. That's a pedophile say were bullshit. That was rock and roll bitch. That was rock and roll the cannot do not associate that with the bars. Not at all. Hey little girl is your daddy home. I went to Moscow with skid row and all this guy's I don't really mean that Bruce. No, you know just jokes we still do these we'd have to pretend we're allowed to judge him.


About the curry. How do you feel about that? Can you can still do jokes can't you went to next but when she does next week's special I need especially Joe romantic comedy right now. So how many was going to take a couple of years before you get one together? You think was writing and testing it out? Who knows man? Who knows? When what do you mean you really need an audience, right? Yeah to test that shit. Well not just test is like just performed a haiku knows when we could perform again, like right now guys are doing some folks are doing outside places for the doing. What's this shit? Spell camp or something about this is like some with some like repeal took over like what's going to do our wedding chapel and he set it up as a comedy show socially distance.


Everybody gets test. I saw one one show but there's more going on a pair does them all the time doesn't count. But where are they? We can you see on YouTube then Yellow Springs Ohio the weightlifting, but can you see them online? Gotta get to go you to be there? I love this guy. That guy is fantastic. So you have to go there. It's not it's not recorded. Nothing bullshit. All right. This has got to be HBO Netflix. He's got to know he's got to be that can we go there then can we go there? Yeah for sure. Have you been I have not yet. Have you been inviting? I've been busy. Yeah, of course. He went out in this place. This is the my career back Jordan. Nope. I'm good. I want to be sympathy but this is the first night we've ever done in this show in this space.


So it's been a weird transition to just decide we're getting out of LA and then literally two months later I asked you about That just because I had similar I was gone within six weeks Once I arrived here. I mean so you felt it and you took your family down here to check it out. You guys have been here before you got business here, right? You've been here before? Yeah. Yeah. I've been here many times. I love love love the city just seems like you went you move real quick. I was surprised. Well, my kids are in Zoom classes. It's a real bummer. It's a bummer and I think it's I think it's really and I'm not saying this is clearly. I'm not saying they Be in school. I don't know maybe right maybe you're you know, what I'm you know what the situation is what you're seeing right?


Now. What I'm saying is um classes are not healthy for kids is that weird? It's weird disconnect. They're not around their friends when they are around their friends. They're more frantic. So like I believe that children need a certain amount of socializing with each other in order to develop of course think it's important. I think it's really good for them. I think it's good for them to emotionally experience conversations with each other unsupervised. It's good. It's good to learn how to talk to people. It's good to you know, go to your parents and tell them, you know, Debbie got mad at me because I said and you say well, you know, Debbie probably thought this and you have these kind of human human interactions. Yeah, this is interesting is what I feel like if kids aren't right in front of each other all the time like that.


They're missing some of that. I don't know if I'm right. I'm hoping that this is just a momentary roadblock and then a few months later from now. We have some sort of viable. Whatever we are whatever it is, whatever it is, we realized okay, we're going to be okay and people can go back to school but kids part of their development is interacting with other kids. It's just part of what is the whole point of going there's it's a there's a dance. They learn they learn I remember things and I said that was mean well you were five years old. Are you worried about your kids having this lapse of this now, they're 1512. I think or 13. Yeah 12 and 10. I don't I'm not worried about it.


In terms of I don't think it's surrounded by it's a minor concern, you know the real concerns, like don't let your kid get eaten by a tiger in Texas where we have a lot of those fucking tigers. Are you kids starve to death don't you know, there's a lot bigger concerns, but I think that as a parent like if you know something you're supposed to teach your kids if you have an idea of something you supposed to explain to your kids if you think you see things that are going in a weird way, so in this in this way, it's like you feel more Or of a need to have conversations with them about just just life overall. And also what they're what they're learning in school, but life overall, maybe even more so to let them know like all these people these people are here.


They're people just like your dad's dummy, right? You know and mom has to figure things out. I guess they have a world. Okay. Okay, your dad will tell you right now dad's it down. He's a dummy. Okay, so come to me with math problems, but like I'm gonna protect You as much as I can but you have to recognize that this whole world is filled with dummies like me. Okay, so most people that are making the decisions or at the very least or choosing the people that make decisions are like me and dumb so know that and they know the lot to swallow for 12 year old said you're old but when you come to me okay with them and let them know like hey like we are all trying to work this out.


This is what being a person is. Do they do you think I mean Daughter just turned 30 my stepdaughters RC 23 and 25 Folly get it my 30 year old. Yeah. She's fucking gets his hope so good. She really told she really gets it. It's awesome when they get it. She's actually Chic when I divorced second times and this is the third final marriage. It's a charm. I love it or so in love. You're actually in love with my best friend. Thank you and and vice versa. My daughter came to me said she sat me the Lioness came back to the Lions. Listen, I'm glad you left her. This is all this what you've done wrong. Here's the stuff that I think is fucked up.


Here's how you fucking damn. It was I'm really stupid fucking shit and hurt me a lot. But I forgiven you and now you are going to get up on your two feet. You're going to be a fucking man. You're going to move on and she blessed me on everything and it was the most beautiful moment in my life. And from there. It's just been soaring soaring and that's when she had she had figured out she Had figured out before I had a very impressed with her. Let's have a very impressed with her. Yeah, and that was just and you know what? I think every child eventually comes to their parents and has a version of that conversation at some point. Yeah for sure and I think it's really great.


The hope is that you'll do better than yours did and then your curves of the better than yours we evolved or so afraid, you know, making it worse or making them feel the pain. That we felt or rejection or disappointment and that's very it's a slippery slope. You know, what you what you do there. Yeah. I think we have to go back to what we're talking about. We haven't even been talking for that long. We would talk it for 50,000 years and already we've dumbed it down to fucking fingers on a touchscreen. But do you realistically it's been so short here the amount of time you make a good point. We were talking. Yeah. We're no longer talking we're telling Texting Joe were texting little weird dip.


I think we're going to be okay right texting. I honestly feel like if you looked at the way technology evolves things technology evolved sinks towards demand and I think Liz illegitimate demand today for more connection and people are finding it tracing jars. Yes plane it would of course. Yeah. Yeah, they do it. Of course. I think if technology could eliminate this bizarre our aspect of social media where you write things out and a person is not in front of you when this communication is delivered and you know, you're hurting their feelings, but you don't have to experience their their pain or look in their eyes and see they're uncomfortable.


My stepdaughter Ellen. She had moved she moved to Chicago with her fiance just before two weeks before the shutdown from Austin to their they were getting ready to head jobs lined up everything. Shut the fuck down. Terrific shit, they've gone through but they already were on a path in there now accelerating that path. They're going to Maine they're unplugging. They're going to live completely within a smaller Nomads smaller Community now smaller Community big loves going going back a little bit and I don't think there's anything wrong with that we can learn a lot from this and if that's the trend and we all make babies, please that's we still have to make children dogs are not a substitute.


I love dogs. We need to keep Making babies people otherwise would become Japan and the Japanese dead trap. The money will be fine you we're going to have Ubi some version of it will be very Innovative. You got to keep pounding the old in-and-out. They you got to keep making baby. We need babies. Otherwise, that will be a problem. That's just my view. I could be wrong smoke some weed today. There's nothing Noble like to say like that. We don't need any more people. Oh we're over the population bomb has been going on forever, but it is kind of true. There's a lot of people especially if you're in a place like yeah, but there's also what's also kind of true is don't you like people I love people they're my favorite things.


People are the best things in the world to play. They're awesome. Yeah, there is a problem. There's too many of us. The really is there really seems to always work out. It was just Too much here in too much then and too much that I'm not I'm not opposed to the idea a lot of space and a lot of space in the world to do for now. Maybe if we keep growing eventually is going to come to a point but then there's the other concept that as things westernize people are less and less and less likely to have children early in life because they want to that's okay their career. That's okay. But then it's our populations drop. No, but you still gotta do your two points 2.3 children. Yeah, you can have do it later. Yeah that you my parent I remember.


My mom said I'm getting my tubes tied because I've done my duty to the country 2.3 chat three kids. I've done my three kids. I'm above average. I'm tying that shit up done with that and that and that was what you did at the time. I'm gonna have the tube side tubes tied. That's right. And then she still divorced and had a much happier life without my dad. I believe imagine back in the day when There was no tubes tied. There was no nothing. Yeah, but Joe, what are we grow up with you can stick your dick in gonna get AIDS. So we grew up with what the hell was all that about. Where does that go? It went away with yeah went away with science went away with science and voting is an amazing amazing how it went away killed wonder.


What do you think happened? But wasn't those protease and with was with HIV that's a whole nother show by itself. For real. Yeah. It really is you really look I can. Give you some books if you and I've done this. I've just like I looked at 9/11 all this stuff. There's a lot to it the HIV and it's Anthony falchi. It is dr. Burke's it is red fits all the same people. And is it that any time there's anything huge like that's an enormous medical concern. There's an also enormous amount of money involved. Is that part of the problem? Yeah. Yeah. That is well the whole the whole system it in two thousand eight or nine. There was a financial Conference JPMorgan Chase Goldman Sachs whatever and they were talking about the future of medicine and vaccines and everyone was all jacked up about it because vaccines are not regulated the same as every other medication.


So they you know, they you can't be held liable. If someone has a problem from your vaccine now, there are practicing courts where the government quietly give you money and you can get some restitution. But if the vaccine is shit, you can't sue the pharmaceutical company so So they saw this as a great like holy shit. This is great thinking from a financial perspective. You giving people medicine charging for it before the sick rice is great. So you had vaccines against smoking addiction and things that really don't think fit the actual description of vaccines. And now we're at the magical RNA the MRNA vaccine which is supposed to not trick your immune system by giving you a piece of the original virus but to trick your immune system into Changing something in your DNA that will reject the virus when it encounters it so it's a little different and it's not been proven to work.


But days as you're freaking me out on Curry's not it's it's very mainstream knowledge. It's not like this is something new. I was just seemed like the next chapter of the horror movie because that's what it is Cyrus gets released. Everybody's forced to not work unrest in the streets murder racist murder. Yeah possible miles on fire would always have as happens energy comes fucking Joe and fucking Adam. We got our fucking shit strapped on. What a koala Bang. I have faith in the Republic. I'm not worried. The pret doesn't matter who our president is. The Republic still has all the tools and the legality to function fine. I don't care the I have a preference that's irrelevant.


I think there's a republic continues to function one way or the other we have the right Tools in place doesn't matter who's President is not life or death. There are shortcuts to a good future. That's for other people to determine but we don't have to be worried about shit because America I'm glad you're optimistic. I am and I think there's a there's a real value and being optimistic but I share your optimism. I think we move if you look at human beings from you know measurable history to today. It's a clear path of doing better. It doesn't mean that everything is perfect right now. It's not but we got to look at Behavior.


We got to look at like what what do you do? Do you want someone lighting the building on fire? Because there's Die inside you disagree with who was the most Progressive mayor in the fucking country or something, but I wasn't progressives. He's like not enough like not Progressive enough. This guy is the most Progressive guy the mayor of Portland might be the most doesn't that show that we're a little misguided and we have to I am back and take a look at what's going on. I think that they're they're misidentifying the conflict. It's not as simple as I believe this and you believe that and I want to be Irrational and you want to be remembering and we're talking about how you need?


Some kind of challenge survival challenge in your life to be a full human being. Yeah this I think unfortunately what happens to probably younger people say 20 to 30 is their challenge has now become this dangerous game of taunting. Yeah burning doing more than just protesting it can start with protesting but that becomes a thick lifeblood that you need to have and need in order to feel like a full human. I mean, this is yeah we have our own challenges to Like we are full humans. I'm you have yours. I have mine. It's providing for your family and certain level of success or whatever. You're looking for creating balance, right creating Harmony happiness, isn't it?


Neat? Yes, it's somewhere need it needs the input, but it needs the inputs and results you need something that's hard. That's either physically challenging or mentally challenging or just work intensive or concentration. Yeah, and this replaces that for a lot of people I think so. Just need something to do a hundred percent and it excites the tribal aspects of our imagination. It really does and it's unfortunate that does that because it forces people to behave in this really like the conflict has already been established. So it's very clear conflict. It's not as simple as I think one thing you think of different thing and you can tell me why you think something and I can just accept it without a judgment on me as a human being in my intellect.


And the problem is if you have something that's opposed. Or is opposing the the ideas I have in my head. I think that you got me you made you tap me out. You made Checkmate, right? I'm like fuck this guy. I'm going to fight this out, right? That's all you got to go. Get some volume deprogramming. We need deep programming specifically in the idea that your ideas equal you. That's crazy. Like yeah, like, you know, you can most you should be a thing that thinks and when ideas are presented to you. You just saw it. Hmm. Is that valid? Is that good? For everybody's that bad like what is that? Is that poison the drinking water right and then move from there, but when we look at anything through the lens of ideology, we have these boundaries.


We you know, you can't be it's fear. I think Choice is still public anything is still fear that you want to look over there. But you almost kind of afraid like what if I agree with it, you know, we have to be we have to find the courage to be less afraid of being open to other thing. There's a lot More people than anyone really realizes who are not red or blue or white or black a lot. We had these meetups No Agenda meetups and it's just it's self organize people. They get together all over the world five people 20 people, you know, sometimes bigger sometimes smaller and they're from all different ages backgrounds colors religion race, but they know one thing I'm going to be clumsy here and I'm not going to get triggered by any fucking shit you say and it's and we know that Agreement is there and even if people are completely opposite it's like okay man.


Could one of the beer. It's possible we can do this week is on a percent possible can do this and this idea that you have to be, you know, everyone has to be an agreement of every single goddamn issue in the world or was he can't connect with them. It's nonsense. It's bad for all of us. I think what we were talking about earlier that labels should be illegal. It's a joke, but it's not. No. It's not a joke really. Just something to it man is something to the idea that labels are a real problem with us. They're real problem because we hear those labels and there's like a checklist and things you need to my mom on this.


I'm pro-second Amendment. You have to write all these things down and then you have to like if someone is done the same tribe as you you have to agree with them about everything everything politically. I think a lot of My Views overlap with what some would call conservative. Yeah, but I found an incredible insult as you call me Republican or even a Libertarian or democrat. I don't want to be fucking lame. I don't need that. It's not fair. I think the best evidence is actually taking place is what's happening right now between the right and the left and how polarized everything is how a weirdly post but is it really I think that I think that everyone is now an agreement. Okay shit's Outta control. We got to stop this whatever is going on in the streets.


It's not everywhere but it's enough of it that it's fucked up. We got to stop it. Yeah, it was an agreement. So now both political parties are kind of, you know, the Democratic party and they've come in sailing in. Oh Okay. Yeah, we think they should stop so that I think it will start to stop. This is going to have to happen. Well, we it's one of two things is going to happen. It's going to stop or it's going to accelerate right and that that if it's all dependent upon how what kind of reaction people have to so whenever you want to take over a society the best strategy is strategy from above and below so the below right now and if let's just say if someone is thinking about this and running this and trying to Fuck with us below is your on the street riots black lives matter inequality.


Whatever people are pissed off about above is covid. That's that's why it's dangerous for us because we have this over pounding Factor. Yeah overall fear of hurricane and an earthquake death and you don't an asteroid. Oh and an asteroid. Yeah, I think we both agree that we probably can be okay through this. Yeah, it's better if we don't freak out. Out. Yeah, we look for possible positive outcomes. And that's what I think. I think it's hard. It's hard. It's hard. Yeah, and honestly, I think what I said earlier about controversial people having platforms.


I think it's important that people figured out for themselves. You can't trick me with a faith healer. Why is it going to trick you? Is it going to trick your kids? What are you telling your kids like isn't a problem that we need to To educate people as to what people are capable of lying about trickery Cults evangelists late night TV people try. Yeah money shouldn't We like Let Them exist and then point to him see ya kids and he's an alligator that'll eat your dog. I believe an alligator. Yeah, if you walk that alligator by the leg it'll eat your dog. Now if this illegality going on within any crack or whatever then you need to of calling to process that immediate but it is the elite it should be a paralegal like you fucking pretending me you're talking to Jesus and to give me an anointed.


Bandana that's going to protect you from any financial side. Oh, I know. I don't think that should be illegal no fucking way. What do you know? What do I know about the band and the code the power of the bandana can be very big. I don't know that Tom Hanks movie and it's real which one big something like that remember big head like the thing. Yeah, of course. I know what that was that W imagine if you were me and I was you for like 24 hours. Where'd you go? But our lives what would you do would be the first thing you did? Wow. I don't know man. That's really I think I'm really gonna test out what I can do with my Jujitsu and all that fucking shit. Let me go to the gym for a second fuck back.


Kick fucking motherfucker Okay, I like the silence to remember this when I get my old body I can imagine when that does happen where people can literally become like you could put your body in an Olympic gymnast body. I want something that's you that's you on the ultimately. That's where he Longs going on. What did you think about the test with the pigs? Well again, I think I love Ilan for Hey, here's my cyber truck is bulletproof windows shatter like and then would like my wheels fine man. The fuck is like a ball bearing at is finally. I know it'll be great in the Final Mix will fix it all and they like the pigs. The pig doesn't want to come out like poop really like I know what you're doing. You've I'm good with it.


I like the idea. I love to see people who have MS or ALS whose brain is not commute Parkinson's whose brain is not communicating the functions to be able to keep those goings the things that's the initial application and that's fantastic. Right? But am I interested in at least Jamie sleeping? I thought it was snoring. I am very interested in the application of direct interfacing just I like to go just go. I just want to do my email right like that and everything just happens because he's right the interface between our brains and the network the whole community. World is actually going from ten fingers to to one or two with our phones.


I like the idea of upping that van with transfer I think but I would like to be able to make sure I can turn it off and Ice control when I when I want it. What does that sort of go in line with what we were talking about? Like people have only been talking for a short amount of time sure, like sure the four people were talking. It's just Grunts and pointing pictures trying to figure out. Yeah emojis in a way we're going back and we went from emojis on the wall to Emoji. He's on text smiley face. Puke Emoji mask Emoji, but you get it, right? So yeah, that's an abstraction of language as someone sends you a yellow Fest. So that is actually how computer code works. Yeah computer code is binary in assembler on top of it.


You got it may be interpreted in a scripting language and then is almost English and before you know it you just saying this emoji and you put these two images together, you know exactly what I mean. That is so when you get that when you get the raindrops with With the he's crazy too fucking what is that thing the the way eggplant eggplant eggplant and you know what? I mean Joe Rogan not answering my texts not answering might not answer. My my my eggplant water emoji text. But eggplant watermelon Bowl move by peach peach peach Emoji exactly. You can bring that to court and people like I don't try to tell me clearly That's another benefit of the of the phone the flip phone that can't really do emojis.


That's good. Moving on. I go mom Madame Curie. So we wrap this up. Yeah Joe Rogan. Thank you so much again. Welcome to Texas. Welcome to Austin. You've got yourself a beautiful Studio much. We did it. We did it. Welcome to welcome to Texas Thanks Max. Good night. Welcome to guess number one here at the new place young Jamie are bad motherfucker. You put it together. Fuck. Yeah, Jamie. Try not to duty. It's for the desk Matt Alvarez for the place and that's it. All right. Bye. Thank you. Thank you friends for tuning into the show. And thank you to policy genius. If you are a homeowner head to policy genius.com right now to get started.


They've saved their home and auto insurance customers and average of one thousand one hundred and twenty seven dollars a year and who knows what weirdly specific amount they could save you. You also to Simply Save Kick-Ass home security. You can set it up yourself. It's fucking awesome. So great that US News and World Report named it the best overall home security of 2020 and it's all starts at just 15 bucks a month head to Simply Save.com Rogan get yourself a free HD camera for listeners of this podcast. That's SI MPL is a fe Simply Save.com / Rogan go there and make sure that they know that we sent you where also brought to you by athletic greens fantastic nutritional Insurance.


It tastes great. It's easy to take a dump in it to a bottle water. I shake it up. I drink it I'm good. And if you're interested in upgrading your daily Health routine to use something that's easy to maintain as a daily habit, then you definitely want to check out athletic greens. They deliver it straight to your door. It tastes great. It's high quality and you will be hard-pressed to find a more complete. So whether you're in the US Canada, Australia Europe or the UK jump over to athletic greens.com Rogan 22 claim this special offer today today today special offer today and get their vitamin D3 K to dropper for free with your first purchase.


That's up to a year supply of ammunition boosting vitamin D. So combine that with their Daily Greens and that is some serious nutritional Insurance again head over to f It greens.com Rogan claim to special offer and get that vitamin D3 K to liquid dropper for free with your first purchase. Thank you. Also to me undies the only underwear. I wear I've worn under under where they suck compared to me undies and you can get 15% off your first order free shipping and a 100% satisfaction guarantee. When you go to meet on these.com Rogan, that's me undies.com Rogan all right friends.


Thank you. Thanks for tuning into the show. This was the first episode that we did from the studio. And if you're listening to this, you are not listening on Spotify because this ad is not going to be on Spotify this ad is still on the regular iTunes feed and the RSS feed if your use Android and you have whatever podcast app use starting December 1st, that won't be the case won't be available anywhere else except Spotify. That's the only place we're going to get the audio. So put please go to Spotify. It's easy. It's free get download the app and you can listen forever or as long as we do it. Okay. All right, bye-bye.