
Hello friends. Welcome to the show.. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Roka eyewear. That's Roka, roka.com. And they are in fact the shit. They're awesome. Well, their sunglasses, I have been wearing since they send them to me, but they have great blue blocker glasses, prescription glasses, shooting glasses for the gun range. Insanely lightweight, like really well engineered for get your wearing them light crystal clear optics with a patented tech that make the glasses stay on your face. Even when you're running or working out, they've got these titanium, bendable temples, the things that go behind your ears and they fit form fit to your head, so they fit perfect. They have great styles.


Like they have dope aviators. They have more tactical glasses. They have just cool all around glasses. They have like a bunch of different styles. They all feel fantastic. They are all really well made and these are not some cheap-ass glasses they are trying to internet sell. It's a fucking fantastic brand out of Austin, Texas, and they've been a bit of a secret that top level athletes and military guys for a while and a half. Now we are letting you know, these guys build shit for an Olympic gold medal is iron man champions, Navy seals, a bunch of people that I know. My buddy, Adam Green tree, Tim Kennedy Dakota Meijer and me. That's all I've been wearing. And since they send 'em to me, they're the s**t they are making the best f*****g eyewear on the planet.


They're great. And they're gonna offer you 20% off your first purchase. Just enter Rogan at checkout that's R O K a.com. Enter the code Rogan at checkout. Save 20% off your first purchase. That's roka.com code Rogan. They are in fact, the s**t we're also brought to you by a butcher box. Folks. Butcher box is an awesome company. If you live in a place where it's hard to get grass fed grass finished beef, that's my favorite. That's what I like in a butcher box makes it easy to get humanely raised, high quality meet that you can trust. They deliver 100% grass fed grass, finished beef, free range, organic chicken, heritage breed, pork and wild caught seafood directly to your door.


When you become a member of butcher box, your joining a community that's focused on doing what's better for all that means carrying about the lives of the animals and the livelihoods of the farmers and treating our planet with respect and enjoying better meals together. And now they finally opened up their waitlist. They have their waitlist list because of COVID-19 or you wanted to take care of their existing members. But now finally, they have got it all dialed in. It's time to open up the waitlist and new members are welcome to order today. You can get high quality, super delicious meat frozen at the peak of freshness, Shipt, and vacuum sealed and shipped right to your door with free shipping anywhere in the lower 48. And it's an awesome value. Average cost is less than $6 a meal.


You can choose the box that you want. They offer five boxes for options as well as the popular custom box. And you can choose your delivery frequency. It's just an awesome company. Sign up today at butcherbox.com/rogan to get high quality meat delivered directly to your door. That's butcher box.com/rogan. We're also brought to you by Harry's. Harry's founder's Jeff and Andy started Harrys has to be a little bit different. They're tired of big brands that were over-designed out of touch and cost too much. So they found it Harry's with a promise to consumers, quality razorblades. At honest prices, as low as $2 per blade refill.


Now, seven years later Harry's keeps his promise with a release of their sharpest blades ever at the same low price. Their new Swedish steel blades are as low as two bucks each. And if your new customer, or you can try it out, how are these new sharper blades by going to harrys.com/rogan. They keep it simple. They sell quality blades. At honest prices. Harry's new blades are so sharp that in a study with guy shaving four times a week, the guys reported that with Harries blades, their eighth shape was as smooth as there. First. You can use them everywhere, even on, yeah, that's right. The five blade cartridge distributes pressure. When shaving, helping protect against Nixon, Harry's bought a German factory.


That's been honing razorblades for a hundred years. They source their Steele from Sweden and they owned the entire manufacturing process from research and development to the factory floor. And that allows Harry's to keep the prices low. They confidently stand by a 100% money back guarantee on harrys.com. If you don't love your shave, you'll get a full refund. Harry's has an amazing offer for listeners to the show. New U S customers can redeem A Harry's trial set at Harry's dot com slash Rogan. You get a five blade razor featuring their new sharper blades. A nice way to handle foaming, shave gel with Allo and a traveler cover to protect your BLAID. When you're on the goat, just go to harrys.com/rogan and redeem your trial offer to day.


We're also brought to you by blue moon beer. One of my all time, favorite beers. This is an easy ad for me because I drink it. I actually order this at restaurants. When I used to be able to go to restaurants, you can still go if you're somewhere else, but not in Los Angeles. If you go to a bar, well, can't go to a bar here either. Anyway, you can get it delivered. How about that blue moon we'll deliver to you. Just go to get.blue moon beer. And in some areas, local delivery is available in one to three hours. It's an awesome beer. I can tell you what they say that it's a full flavored beer with refreshing notes. Unlike any other Valencia orange peel for garnish provides balance oats create a smooth creamy, finished, best served, and a glass with a signature orange garden To showcase its beautiful here, Color, but what I'll tell you is in a fucking cold glass with a really nice cold blue moon.


Ah, it's just delicious in the name. Stuck. After a satisfied taste are set up a beer. This Good comes around once in a blue moon. Well, next time you need to taste the extraordinary, open up a blue moon and get it delivered. Get blue moon delivered by visiting. get.blue moon beer.com to see your delivery options. Bloom reach for the moon. Celebrate responsibly blue moon brewing company, golden Colorado. All my friends. I have. To hilarious woman on the podcast today where we're at the comedy store the other night. And we hadn't seen each other in person in months since the COVID.


And we were having so much fun. We were laughing so hard and Whitney Cummings was scheduled to be on the podcast today. And we had been in his f*****g Savage text chain, make each other laugh. And I said to Whitney, I said, what do you think about like having an Annie come on with us? And she was like, f**k. Yeah. And it was the right call. These two together are hilarious, like as funny as any two human beings together on earth. And I really think they should do their own Podcasts. I know you've heard that from me before, and you're gonna hear at, during the podcast, but I think I'm right. I think that will dominate the girl team Podcast game. Anyway. Please give it up for the great and powerful Annie Lederman and Whitney Cummings The Joe Rogan Experience Joe Rogan Podcast by night, all day.


Do first of all, how did you do not have a show together hanging with you guys the other night at the store? First of all, how much fun was that fun? But it is that what I can remember, because it's been so long, it's been like six months now. Was that what? Every night was like a lot of nights we like to just have the craziest and the like a circus, just, just laughing constant. We use to go to the back bar and crack each other up. Yeah. That was the constant thing for hours. Either in the backbar the back smoking area in everybody was laughing. Yeah. And you get it like a low grade depression when you're not around it. And you forget, you forget for months and months and months. And then we had one night, we're all shooting up and say a ridiculous s**t.


And do you feel like I had like a crush on the night? I kept thinking like for the first time, that was like, Oh, that night. And I know is he thinking about me texting with you guys? Remember this three days replaying that that was so funny. I got so emotional when I pulled up and then I'd walked into the store. I almost cried. I was like, I can't believe I'm here. Like it's. And then this is why it's not like any other look, if I have been away for five months and I came back and be like, I can't believe I'm here to be great. But I was like, Ooh, is here going to ever be here again is never going to be what it used to be, because it didn't feel like there's no reason why it shouldn't be. If we could do it the other night and meet with the way we did the other Knight, everybody gets tested.


You going, hanging out in is fun. And we let you guys do the test. We do offer, unfortunately, My chlamydia killed my Covitz. I'm going to cancel each other out. <inaudible> Yeah, we don't. No. Right. What if it's an annual thing that keeps coming back? I have a friend who got malaria and then he got malaria again when he got sick. So it had been dormant inside of his sister, my friend, Justin Wren. He runs fight for the forgotten. He does charities and a, the Congo. We built a Wells for the Pygmies and he's there all, he got malaria three f*****g times. And so he goes over there, he gets malaria, like deathly ill comes back and then he beats, it does all the medication. Then a long time later, he gets really sick.


And when he gets sick, the malaria kicks back in again. And he wasn't even in the Congo, the marriage, No, there is like not to be forgotten as well as a charity for a minute. Malaria has killed more people than anything like anything ever. My dad had malaria. He was born and his D, he was born in Panama because his dad was stationed there. And he got malaria when he was a baby, but it never came up again. I never knew her. Jamie, do we look this up in it? They say that, ah, no, I f**k this up. That malaria has killed. Half of the people who've ever died ever. Whoa, something that meant that's when we looked that up, it's been next. JAG is ready for a little bit, but it's definitely killed a lot of people. Lets say if we say a quarter, it is probably pretty. I imagined that just lets say an eight 25% have all the people that I've ever done.


It ever been killed by malaria. Right? So they just, I just put this on my Twitter or my Instagram and that they released or they are about to release some f*****g untold hundreds of millions of genetically modified mosquitoes in the Everglades, laser in the Florida keys, a bit of Florida keys. You know who the f**k knows. And what is this supposed to do? I don't know. You get some f*****g nervous. You read the delivering the backseat. I just got scared from it. And then we got a text from a friend of mine is a biologist and he was, what the f**k are they doing? Y'all are scared. Now. I'm really scared. I saw you post that. I was like, maybe I should read the article. And then I was like, reading is really challenging. Maybe I'll just go. I'm still catching up. And one of the murder Hornets, like I still don't know what happened with a pee tape.


Like I'm so behind every day as some crazy adrenalizing story, Do you think the piece of tape is real and is it going to come out like right before the election, but it, if it does come on right before the election, but what does it work now? Because of the mail in thing like people are, are they're voting already. Right, right, right, Right, right. I think we are sort of at a point where nothing f*****g matters. We're in this sort of nihilistic thing where its like, if a piece of tape came out right now, trumped like peeing on someone, we would just be like, I don't care. Nobody cares people. Trump to learn. Like I like him cause of how he treats women is as long as I know he doesn't pee on women. I love how a women leave the room with him drive from here. As long as he didn't apologize. He'd be fine. Yeah, exactly. Then as soon as I do apologize, you're f****d because you can't cancel Trump.


It's like it is, it's like in a car accident as the first person to apologize, that's their fault. So you'd got to just get out of the car accident and just be like, what f**k me. But it is a gross thing when someone hits you and then they say that was your fault. You're like, Oh cool. You never apologized. Do you told me that your dad told you that Right never apologize. Yep. Which you told me after I got in a car accident, you're like the one my dad gave me. That was the best advice was when you're in a car accident. Never say, sorry, could you, do We get blamed for it? It, but what if you actually are actually did it than you should say, sorry, if you hit somebody with your car or are you, I'm going to see this s**t out of each other, You are missing a leg. I'm not paying for that. Why don't you think you should say, sorry if you're a rear end someone and of course, yeah, No I did that. I was thinking about. Yeah. Cause you posted that irresistible, that book the other day, dude, I have your added someone texting like a year ago and I got out and I was like, I know I need to have a consequence for this behavior because I was texting and driving.


Well We have to get the consequence. Caitlyn general. You have to become a man. It's when you have to transition out, can you give me your doctor? And he <inaudible>, that's how you avoid the consequences. Right? Cause nobody even talks about the Caitlyn Jenner thing. Yeah. But it was the joke where it's like, he harvested the vagina of the day. How many kilos of that? That is what I miss so much honestly, but that's Kurt Metzger and he hasn't been canceled than a couple of years. Need to be re canceled at your current job. He's so fun to go to wake up and being like, f**k you guys, you just can't He's he's it's a travesty. That, that guy is not a more well known every time I do podcasts with them too. He's so a funny on Podcast he's smart as f**k.


He's a really well read. He's great. Yeah. His idea Or very unique, funny, smart they're is something that was so important at the comedy store. The other night is that these last six months have sort of hoodwinked me into believing that like jokes are dead, that we're not allowed to make jokes anymore than right. And because Twitter is sort of, you know, we're hallucinating with all the s**t we're seeing on Twitter and, and blowing it up to be bigger than a, it should be. But like as soon as I saw Tony Hinchcliffe right now, No, I said, Oh my God, You said every one exploded. Laughter. And I was like, ah, f**k you. Oh, he's the best for that? That little m**********r. I will say the most evil s**t. No. When something happens for her, I mean, Toni, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, No, no.


I don't think we're designed to just be on the internet if you're just on the internet and not seeing human beings and making jokes or an actual people, you can be tricked into thinking that that s**t is real Well. Stan hope really said the best. Once you said I could quit Comedy but I couldn't quit comics. And that's what the other night was like, like I've, I've had my little fixe where I did a weakened in Houston, a a couple of hundred a month or so ago, but it wasn't as fun as last night that night it was the most fun. It was just a bunch of comics. And just laughing again, <inaudible> talking over each other. It was just like An amazing, but this is the art form of saying s**t you don't really mean. And everyone knows him. We all know, like if you say something really gross to me, I know you don't mean it.


And I'm laughing harder. It's like, it's understood. And it's also understood that you're, you're taking a big f*****g chance with our friendship by saying this crazy s**t around me. Cause you trust me Ultimate trust, fall or something that I'm going to say some crazy s**t to you. You're not going to abandon me or judge me in. And we're going to be its like a Trump, Right? Definitely drama bond. <inaudible> bond trauma. I'm going to name It. That totally should be a special trauma Vaughn. That's a great name for a special, Mmm. You know, I've said some things to you where you've looked at me like, and I'm like, are we not friends anymore? Like, there's two things. I said two that I'll never forget it. And I, because I just say Things when they come to my head, No, I react that way.


It's because I have to react that way. It's like, Do you think you have a CTA CTE in like you could possibly live at one point, like murderer your family. And I'm like, do you want to, do you think I could do it? And I was like, Oh, I don't know. You know, part of the fun is a mock anger. It's like, did you just say to me, it's like No sparring or something. And it's, it's really f****d up because like just what's been going on the last couple of years, you know? It's like, I never feel more equal. Like when people on talking about men and women ever, never feel more equal than when a male comic is f*****g pummeling me. They were not physically. Ah, because they know that I can f*****g take it right now.


No, I'm all right. That's it. That's, what's fun about, and it's like, they are, they're not doing it to be a bully. They knew they are doing it because you want to spot and you can handle it. They're like, okay b***h, lets go out and then everyone's on it. What do you want you to go out and then like salt and walk away that right? Thank you for Nothing everything. Thank you for Nothing. I'm fragile. But it is funny when you just go like a little too far, that's the risk with the pink hair thing that I wrote about? Yeah. It was like, is she going get mad at me about that? She tweeted, we were FaceTiming last night and she had tweeted or a, or an Instagram, a picture of her and she goes, Annie let them in. Or you're a mess. And I wrote okay, pink hair, but it's nothing. I dunno. I was just like, she's going to get a fan, but I don't know. Some people have weird Achilles heels.


You know, some people have weird. I mean, I'm doing the roast it's all the time and it's amazing how you could accuse people rape and say crazy s**t, racist s**t. And then as soon as you say, like your dogs ugly, like they don't want to f**k that storm off. And that's You Roast. Battle was really good for Comedy really good at That's where Andy and I met the first time. Nope. Should we talk about it or meet cute story. We did it start off on great terms. It was, it was okay though. It wasn't that bad. You, you texted me so fast after if it was like, it's so weird. Whitney Cummings she just texted me. But you are intimidating. I'm going to say that there is something very intimidating about U it's because you're showing you're mid trust at all times and it doesn't matter. All all different shapes have muffins.


It doesn't matter if you're a tetanus from your own words, You are. You're confident. That's one thing. But to as well, there's a, there's a fear that you could be mean. So that's what people are scared of that you're confident, but you might be mean. And so like, Ooh, I got to tread lightly. The funniest thing. As like, as a dress, you wear military Garbe, you dress like you need to see it like antisemitic. I'm going to be honest with us. But those foods, you know, I just was like, should I wear sneakers or boots? Annie's dad. Didn't love her. You know, my dad love me a lot and he just do much to me. No, not that much as a teacher. Now you just bragging. I want to know about it. I did. It was when Jason Reitman was filming the roast battle for Sundance.


And it was me against Mike Lawrence. Who's an old friend of mine. We did mix together and stuff. And you and Dane cook where the judge and I remember coming out and being so excited that Dane was there because I had a joke written. But I, when I went, I went and I'm so I'm such a big fan of so glad you're here. But I'm confused if you are here, who is at the improv getting bumped by Kristalina. And he just went, he went away. I didn't expect who is going to go. He went, he went like, that was funny. And then he liked me afterwards and I was scared. Cause I was like, is he gonna like tell me on my joke, suck now. But he is cool. But then he says something else or he said, someone, you know, you really you're a really good your going to be very successful.


And I was like, yeah, but just don't, don't take financial advice from a day. You don't hire her As a story that he told in your mom's house of how his brother stole is money is terrifying. Terrifying. Right? Well, you said to me, I was saying, I was like, I'm when I'm rich, I'm going to get a chef. And you were like, keep your circle small. And you know, like, you don't want to fix it If you don't even want to an assistant. Yeah. When you, when you have an assistant, that means you do too much s**t. Good, good, good point. And by the time you tell someone to do someone or something, you could have just done to yourself. Yeah. If you can get lucky. I have friends that have had assistance that wind up being they're best friends. It's great. They're just a cool person that they met that need to get a job. But you also have friends that got sued by their assistant and David's Bay got tasered and Ty murder murder by as an assistant.


It's a system that's right. David's made its way. It has on his bedroom door, f*****g a latch like, Oh, like a medieval wooden laugh. And the f****d up part is its from the, from the outside. <inaudible> No, that's so crazy. Like The and he's a small man and he's a tiny little guy. So the fear of that must've been terrifying. Yeah. And his, I think the assistant, he told us a story. He had taken like overdosed on Tylenol PM or something. And if you take enough of that, you're body goes into shock and you produced crazy adrenaline. And how is the opposite? Have a soporific effect or something. Really? So the guy, it was like hopped up and nuts.


And I think David had a gun under his bed in the guy took the gut out. I mean, while if you be careful that you get the keys at your house to house, are we going to say it be careful of, if you try to Rob David spade, he's got a gun under, is that right? Or if you do just come in slow and sneak into the best of luck, It is a water gun for is Comedy. But, but also it's it's any assistant that wants to be a celebrity assistant wants what you have maybe. Right, right. Or maybe they just think it's a good job, but it's generalizations are, are business right now. They're fun. They're fun. But you can have a nice assistant. You can have a nice secretary or you can have good people that you work with. Like there was a lot of people that are Comedy teams' and it works out great. Like look at Matt stone and Trey Parker. Those are those. F**k. You guys have been banging it out and making awesome s**t forever.


Yeah. What are the ones that have been banging you? Like they're not out there are not, but so how did we meet with him? And I, but You know, it's like, there's a generalizations. We always like to talk about Comedy marriages. They don't work out, but sometimes right? Yeah. Rich Boston, Bonnie McFarlane, rich Fosse, bottom McFarlane. My God and Tom and Christine Natasha in motion. Well they work. Yeah. Tom and Christina. There's there's a bit of money. You need to see these kids out. What happened to these kids? They will be funny. Yeah. They are going to be hilarious. Will have to be rich. And Bonnie's daughter just turned. I think she turned 13 Reyna. She is the f*****g funny. Sometimes she does their show with them. I have known as much as a kid and I'm so you think I am scary? I'm like your daughters like a cut in the good way. She's so funny. She's So cutting.


She's what I see her. Her I'm like, Oh, you got to be on your toast because she's the funniest sharper. She's funny when both of them, but imagine growing up in that house. Oh my God. Rich FOSS is one of my favorite jokes that were probably not allowed to tell anymore. He had this joke. That's just f*****g killed him. And he go home. I don't mind f*****g a girl on her period. I just pretend like I'm killing her. Jesus Christ. One of my favorite JRE That's a perfect example. The reason why we're laughing is because he doesn't really mean that that's the problem with writing, something like that down in quotes, you would go, these guys, these f*****g Asles are laughing at this. Also the same people that are complaining about, or the people that watch like true crime s**t and all that, literally masturbating and falling asleep.


Did you get like a lie to a, like a beautiful tale of murder? They watch CSI. They watch it as weird. How many of these shows there are tons per year? The ones, the really dumb ones. Like the CSI ones that are so clunky. Like at the end? Nope. No disrespect. But you know what I'm saying? Like they have, they're kind of have to be the wrapping up a show on an hour. Yeah. At the end of it, there are always, it's always like, and they catch the bad guy every time he, now I can sleep. Yeah. He's in that. What was in that book, irresistible that you were just posting about? Our brains are wired to need completion. And like we have to get to the end of summer. Even if your watching a s****y movie, if someone turns it off from the can I have to f*****g, I know how it ends. It sucks. They're not judging with this movie. Right? No country for old men who is disappointing for a lot of people, because at the end you're like, Hey, that guy is OK.


He gets away. What the f**k? That's a wild note. That's a wild move. Right? No. I rewatched a lot of classic movies over the last six months because we haven't been able to do anything. And I rewatched that s**t. That s**t is insane. That the weirdest part is the haircut is the craziest part. It's a district. He as disturbing looking that dude is so good. Wait it out. What I look like right now, where has your eye bags? And that to me in 10 years' when I go to full Joan Rivers, what is his name again? Javier Bardem. When I go full Joan, right? You know, one time I was at the Bray, improv high as f**k, like way too high. And I'm sitting there just breathing heavy.


And Joan Rivers show came on the television. And when you see someone with those fillers in their face and the ratios all off, cause its like it in their faces and moving. I was horrified. I was sitting in, they're just barbecued watching a screen going on. Oh my God, this is crazy. I have a theory about Plastic surgery. If your going to like trim some off the knows, you have to put it on your chin or something like you have a certain amount of face meet and it has to stay on your face. Your right. There's a, there is actually a golden ratio. So the Fibonacci sequence actually applies to your face. That's why when someone gets a nose job and you're like, your nose looks good, but it doesn't look like it. What was happening? Nature knows what it's doing. There's a certain arrangement.


It's a, it's like whack-a-mole, if you mess one thing up, your gonna have to move everything else. But I was reading something about body dysmorphia about how we've gotten so dysmorphic about what we look like. Cause we're always looking at ourselves on screens, it in photo's, which is the reverse of how other people. And they said that if you were to see yourself out in the world, you wouldn't be able to recognize yourself. That's how to say That's ridiculous. Cause this video's of you. No, I also have a twin brother right there. That's famous. Right? No. All my tattoos are like, that's where my head looks like. But like we're just so dysmorphic we have found on ourselves is okay, If you want to say ridiculous s**t sometimes. And it kind of sorta makes sense, but it doesn't like I remember reading once that the native Americans, when they first saw like Columbus in the, the people in the boats coming and then they couldn't see them because it didn't know what that was.


My, get the fuck out of here. We could look at it. How do you like then explain you UFOs. Right? How do people see you for explaining asteroids? If you could see them coming to the aliens, how to feel it. And it didn't take, as long as I thought about it, I Whitney, you owe me $10,000. Why they didn't see the boats. That's a dumb thing that people are like, Oh wow, they did it. We didn't see any, you know what? They saw things that looked like this thing. They are going to find out its called boats coming towards a hundred years ago. That's the f**k. You know what this, I think the most fascinating thing about what your saying is the fact that people are so willing to believe it, which is why we're in this situation when people want to believe crazy s**t.


So when you see fake news, when you see you're like, yeah, that happened. Like you want to believe something ridiculous. No people say things like that. Like they couldn't see the boat so that you pay attention to what they're writing. Like you're like, Oh this guy Let, he's saying crazy s**t in there you go and pee. Like that's why people say crazy s**t. There's a lot of people that are looking for A lot of our friends. I'm like online trolls right now. What are they doing? They're just saying crazy s**t. So you pay attention. I mean, that's that's right now, You know? And its addictive. They know that you get that adrenaline. I just thought they wanted me to. No, I'm a fact because I know she's got to no, she's a bad, I'm a busted cut. I'm my God. Has anything ever hurt your feelings in the comments? If I'm on my period, I'm filled with rage and then I go, Oh s**t.


I go out to the red weak guys. Is they still get your period? That's going to it. Oh my God. Let me just make yourself the elderly for no reason. But at the same age, but you are just more successful than me. That's why I was like, wasn't, you know, we're at the same age are just way more successful than you. And I think of you as being like 20. And I think of me is being like this 71. Well, she had had like a blackout segment of her life. That doesn't count. Right. It counts towards you being funny, but it doesn't count towards like life five years younger than I am, because I just Didn't have those years. But there is one that, you know, luckily for them just drinking, you know, we just, with enough yoga, you can really be done with you drunk before and never no, I quit drinking right before I started Sam right after my first open mic.


I bet you're a tape flasher. It was fun. They call me fun girl Annie which had just really does an insult. Now. He's like, Oh, I was like, that's right. I'm fun. And it sounds like you're fun, but it did it like destroyed your life. Yeah, it would definitely be dead. Now. I think if I didn't stop drinking and what did you drink? Jaeger? I was, I loved Jaeger. I liked whiskey. I liked anything that was like kind of like I would be either being a frat or like with a grandfather. Like it was like very, A lot of her clean comics when you're, I mean, cleaning, meeting, not sober. When you your rack, What is it like to basically and guy to this conversation again or no, But when you go to a bar, like if you're at the comedy store and everyone's drinking For me, not one minute, not for one second.


Yeah. And it's funny. Sometimes people will be like, is it weird? I'm drinking. And I'm like, huh? You think it would relapse with you? I know. Right, right. What if I relapse? I'm like going to throw a party. We are going to an Island. It'll be fun. I've never understood how people could drink so much onstage. When I see stand, hope up there with a f*****g thing of vodka, I just would just move on. What is the time? Stand home drinks bud light though. So it's like a light beer and he drinks at all day like that. You just want to get fat. He's like, I'm not trying to get drunk. I'm trying to get obese. Is that right? Is to keep like a mile buzz all the time. And it's like, it's not a bad way to go. Like Chappelle does that too. If you notice Chappelle will keep a mild buzz. And there's something about mild buzzes that really accentuate who gives a f**k Comedy right.


Like, come on, don't give a f**k that s**t. But as though it was like, so unattractive, I want to be, I was like, let's take like a smoke break from my, so I was like, let's black though. Like by b***h, I have no interest in being like just a little like loopy. I never drank wine until the pandemic. I just f*****g bored and trying s**t out and was like, well what's my personality on this. And that was when I was like trying to find the best version of my personality and it turns out it's <inaudible> so I was doing definitely ketamine by the way, he's been date raping herself because she's been putting herself on a K hole's and then getting right in that hole. Kaye and m********e. Now You mean is like prescribed though.


It's prescribed. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. It's it's like a nasal spray this year. No, it's in my person. We are. Yeah. What's so funny about it as it's a nasal spray, but when I was going to raves and doing it, we also nasally injected. I mean they're are literally just, this is a pretty trace amount. It's not a lot. And I only do it like a couple times a week. A couple times a week. No, no, I'm sorry. Ketamine and stab herself. So it's good. Cudi is on it. Then it went through his arm. Don't even think he cleaned it. Good did it really going through his eyes. So if I pushed it through and they put me for a second, yeah. We hit a nerve the first time they had to back and do it again. I didn't Want to do it one frog live for him. He's fine. He shut the frog out. He threw it up in my hand.


Do you know that there's Called eat that frog? That's like a, about getting your work done in the morning or do you literally eat at the frog? Like eat? Just to get it over with the worse part done. Any of us have swallowed weigh? We were just saying we saw it a lot. No, that's not even a sharp icepick. Did it make us sound at all? No. I just was like puncturing a steak. Right. And it wasn't you picked the spot that What was the kind of pointed me towards his arm? Like what area is a better place to go through? But it was bleeding. I mean, do you think it would taste like elk? I don't think so. I think people taste like pigs, cannibals call people long pigs. That's literally a, a, a nickname.


Did you notice that Blaine whenever he would have you do something, he would first like doubt himself. It's almost like a power of suggestion thing where he'd be like, no, no, it might be fake. Test it out. It might be fake. Remember the frog. It might not be real frog or the, the, this might be weighted. Right? If you can see you are right there. That's where I am. I'm going through his arm. Whose hand is that? That's his, that's his hand. That's his hand. He's like pushing on the skin, dark in my life. He gets tan. Just got a lot of money. Right? If there is something that there's some psychological through that you're very poor or you're very rich or if you're in your face or is there something psychological about him doing that? Like touch it. Maybe it's fake. Make sure it's not fake.


Yeah. I'm sure it does that with cards and that I'm sure. I don't know anything about magic, but it would imagine anything do you do to overload the brain? Like if you are a distraction, if your sparring with someone or fighting, one of the things that you're doing is you're trying to overload their brains. So your moving, you do things you're faint. You fake like your going to punch in. Then you kick them out. But what you're doing is you're f*****g with their heads and giving them too many things to think about. He's kind of doing that to like check the cards out in and he says things and you kinda have doubts himself. And we asked you if you're sure there's so many techniques involved with it, but he is a master Kim doing that s**t too a lot. He had, so he did a card trick with one guy holding one of his wrists and another guy holding on another risk. Like he couldn't do anything up.


His sleeves rolled up and he did a card trick for it. It's so cool. Someone I know, you're not supposed to say how a magic happens, but I know, I don't think that this counts as like, but there was this guy that I knew that we can get in trouble. It was like, I'll never go to the magic castle again. But again, it's going to be so f*****g mad at me. It's coming for me. But sometimes they carve holes into their hands, like flaps of skin. And that's where they put the coins underneath. Like they actually have a, yeah. They carved like a little divots in their hands and that's how they hold the coins. F*****g, you carve out to give it in your skin and then Yeah. That's like scar tissue and that's how they're able to hold the coins. Crazy s**t. I don't know really. Is it really no way to find out how magicians right?


What you'd have to become a magician. Yeah. You got to get in the club. Blamed is telling me that he has a friend. That's a card guy that will literally be playing with his cards 13 hours everyday. Every time it's on the phone with him years, you know, just shuffling and yes, this is what I'm saying to him. I was like, the way you move your hands. It's, it's similar to martial arts because we are, if someone's really good at a martial arts move, they have a gist. The pathway has just greased and slip in. There are neurons when they do it, just shoot. It just goes. And that was kind of to him with his hands. I was watching a movie, the car, then it was like, Whoa, like someone who plays guitar. Really good thing about it. Or piano. Have you seen Kyle's Kyle down a gun's joke about where he's like, I'm not good at magic.


I have good magician hands. And he like, I see, Do you see in the time canceler I, if you haven't seen this new thing to do now, my God, where do you think he goes back at time to cancel from the past? It sound good, man. He says a tweet. He says like a mildly racist tweet, like a D is it just me? Or does Indian foods smell funny? And then it has to throw himself into a woodchipper. And so as a team of incredibly diverse women, scientists rebuild him and they put them back together again like the $6 million man out of the woodchipper. And then they turned them into a much more walk version of himself who is at a time cancer. So he's part machine and he goes back in time on my hands and feet. It's f*****g hilarious. That's so funny, Dude.


I miss everyone. I know it sucks. It's weird to think that we saw each other every night, every night for 15 years And just talk that s**t, having fun and boom, it stops So weird. Like a family being broken up, You should have stopped. I really don't. I don't, you know, I think people should be able to make their own decisions. Well, I think that there's ways to do, we could do the weird social distance. Things you know, where it's, it could either be outside or could be, you know, people who are far back and spread out or wearing that so that people are allowed to go outside. Have socially distance means, but as soon as someone stands up, but with a microphone and starts talking, it is a spitty job though. I was watching when they changed the light's in the main room, right before everything's shut down, the lights were dark.


I was watching you from the side. I've never seen so much that I was like, Oh, it's like a f*****g what? Its like, well, the sprinkler's kids jumped through that was like droplet after a droplet, it all Gallagher. It turns out and it's like, Holy s**t. And then, and when I was thinking, and then I went, Oh my God, when it got shut it out, we really do deserve. I mean, I think we might deserve, this is spreading into bikes and then like made out with him and Dylan pretty much. I've gotten the flu a couple of times from peoples' microphones. One time they did a gig with Tami and Tommy was sick as f**k we're in San Francisco. And we all got the flu. Cause we shared it. A microphone together, Davidson know a cigarette. I started bringing a microphone with me on the road like a year ago because I kept getting f*****g bronchitis from the Bronx.


That's good. Bring your own M**k. That's a good idea. My opener, everyone thought I was such an a*****e being a diva, but it was just like, dude, I can't get sick. I did like 40 cities before I shot is special. And it was so worth it. I think that I do think there's a lot of things that are happening in this that could carry over. I know you think are massive for p*****s or whatever, but I like that. Its like a mushroom. There was a bird clip that went viral. How are you trying to talk him into talking s**t? You know the funniest. It was very funny. I liked you. Or even though I am wearing a bandana, I have a, I want to get a cool one. I'm trying to think, Oh I'm wait, can I show you the master that I'm making? I was tried to Jay Leno would not approve of these. I was thinking about doing a joke. Remember when all the other prisoners were released to the people, buying it f****d where they'll buy it, where do, where can they buy it?


I'm like, well go to my website. I'm going to launch them gem launching this week. You got to do it immediately. Otherwise people are going to judge on this, launching it today when I leave, because the problem is when this goes up, these f***s they'll they'll start putting it up before you. Right? Well I'm launching it today. That's the Annie Lederman thing. If anyone does a Joe Rogan going to f*****g say to you, I'm going to get a hundred million dollars. So in your life There are so many people selling bootleg s**t online right now. It isn't that funny though. You know like everything, all that s**t will bootleg shirts on it. There's a lot of my shirts that are bootlegged. A lot of like Muggs and stuff or a bootleg, all of these different things that I have nothing to do with me with my face on that. This is sponsored by the Joe Rogan Podcast Experience that's a Yeti tumbler.


Yeti tumbler. Yes. It's legit. It's very literal. Everything's Yeti involved with UW every time I've got the Comedy. So when we're talking it somehow turns into you fighting bears. I swore every conversation we can talk about f*****g anything and it's like three minutes. It, once you walk in it, I'm like, and we were fighting bears again. I have a real problem. We gotta get you. No, no, no. I don't want to have anything to do with bears. I'm scared of nature. Really? Yeah, for sure. It's like you kill it. Well, no. Do you want it to run out of the taser? I run the little taser now I have a big knife. I have please don't run with a knife. I've seen him play basketball. I have a little taser. It's a, it's not a bad idea. I carry nunchucks. I carry paperweights that fit on your knuckles.


Put it in my favorite. I know I want to do what should we do? We have got to get more views than Dave. That'd be great. If it turns out that's her Achilles heel, she just falls over. Like she had so much fun. I've been to having that week or so it was a good week or something to drink Jaeger. This was going to be f*****g awesome. So that's your thing. So when there like a mountain lion comes after, he just, he just f*****g knuckle punch him without the thing. Just to protect your dog's from you. Wow. To like meet up, they look at their bed and then a little a hammer in my car for me. Are you serious? Oh, hold on, bear it. Can you just hold off on any of the heater? My tastes are just talking about bare grille or whatever that guys name is.


We're not talking about large overweight gay men. Why don't you just touch that? Oh my gosh. That's not real, but it wasn't working. So it wasn't that bad. It's really not that bad. It's a dog collar. Jesus is the, bear's going to also agree that it's not that bad, but it's got, I touch one little one and it's a lot of him. And he just said Most likely if a mountain lion, even if you have a knife or if mountain lion gets you, you're f****d. Yeah. And they'll go straight through your face. You want to just be able to sink something into their neck. I watched the covenant every day I go to covenant. Is that what it was called? Right, Right, right. I gotta go taste me quick. I'm going to come back from this, You know, based on a real story.


And it is, it's a little f****d up. I made the switch a lot of s**t around and change some things. But it's kinda based on a real story. Yeah. That scene was sober. Right. There were Alder that, that eye, that's the only movie that had to like take breaks from a lot of us watching it, like with the, when his kid was dying and he couldn't get up and save as a kid that just like destroyed me. You are so funny on that. Right? So when Joey foul, I always tell this story. Joey fell and hurt as an need at the comedy store one night and Whitney was with them. He ended up being alright, but he just, he just trapped or whatever. We're not going to see you Comedy story. But he was like setting on a, on a rolling chair and Whitney was like, and I, when I rushed over and I went Whitney or are you okay?


I was destroyed, know Joey walked into the kitchen. You know it, right. When you walk in with the greatest slipping from the airframe or something, don't know what it is. It's so oily right there at Joe F*****g orders of fries. Come flying through that. That's all, anybody buys is fries and chicken wings. It's all that oil. It's like a thick s****a I'm on the ground. You can feel it. You always catch me eating the worst food. I'm always like shoving. Right. Right. And then Rogan looks at it and I'm like, are you getting it? Do you do it in those like pretzels, the nuts and just everything I'm using because that's a good Joe is in front of me. And we're going through the side, right. Joe is in front of me. I just see him go down. And my brain just went, Joey had a heart attack.


Joey had a f*****g heart attack. He goes down, his leg went behind him. It was so some crazy s**t where he did like a split and we couldn't figure out what even happened. And he talked to me, he tore something on this new smear, his ankle, something not as ACL butt, something that was bad. And he couldn't walk. He couldn't get up. And if you were having a stroke or heart attack or you don't know you're having it. So I guess he kept saying like, I fell out my knee. I fell out my knee and I was just so worried. Do you remember Jay Leno is telling us a story about Rodney Oh. Yeah. So he's hosting the tonight show. Ronnie does a set and he's like, something's off. He's like, ah, the cold call, the paramedics of the timing was off and he was joking around kind of, but he also knew that something really was wrong. So they called the paramedics. They checked Ron and he did have a f*****g stroke.


So you had a stroke while he was out there doing stand up, which is crazy. It's insane. Someone die on stage doing stand up too. People have, there was a British guy. I don't know his name who had a heart attack on stage. And then there was years ago, Jim Norton had posted a clip of it. There's a clip. If there was a, a live kind of a variety show. And there was this guy, I can't remember his name. I wish I remembered it. But he, he was, he was doing a bet in front of a curtain and live television and he passes out and falls out in there, all laughing, thinking it's part of the bet. And then you see them drag him out. Right. But its kind of a good way to go to this guy. Jesus, where was this There? Oh my God. Oh that's how I really died.


Was it a heart attack? Yeah. I think he died of a heart attack and that f****d up your don't grab your heart while we do. No, it was up their hearts As well. I always think I was telling Whitney about this. When you are like flexing her pack, is there something in the kitchen have the comedy story? And I was like, I'm going to try and do it. It will put your t**s away. It's so it is so funny because so people want to like go female comics, male comics, like I feel like were so wouldn't where together were so weirdly genderless. Like where like brother and sister, you know You talking to me is that the other night that it's a real meritocracy. If you're funny, you're one of the clan and that's really all right. I get that.


It's upsetting for people in the outside. I guess you are not as a club. That's a friend of mine who is a philosopher, very smart guy. I try to explain it to me. And he just completely independent of this. He's like, you guys have to understand that you are little and he's on a comic at all. It's like this, a little group of people's like a walled garden. And so there's a lot of people on the outside of it this see you guys are having so much fun and doing all these things together and having each other on your toes. Podcasts and there just an automatic feeling that in human nature to feel like you're alienated from that group. So that group somehow or another disrespects you then a group is negative or bad or mean, or this or that. And then it compounds right. You know? And then it becomes, find whatever the group is, whatever your identity politics is, a right wing thing or a girl thing or a gay thing or a boy, things, sports, whatever you need to find, they find thing that makes you different from them and you negative and positive.


And you're a suppressor or your a bad person that outward the outward locust of control rate. So it's like saying that my life has where I don't wanna be because you made me feel this way or it's not like, because if you think about it, anyone complaining about their place in comedy, it's like that's the time to write jokes and that you're focusing on why you don't have a thing. Has none of you have no clue. It anyone's story is, as you don't know, if, if it was easy or hard for them, you have a note, but it is a hard job. It's not a comfortable job. Some of the people complaining have had specials. So you've had a chance you got on comedy central, you got on Netflix, you got somewhere and people didn't respond. Yeah. And that's not because the Comedy store is filled with a******s. That's not what that is. It is.


It's a f*****g hard thing. Right? Comedy is a hard thing. Right. And honestly the heart or the hallways are the easier it is on stage. So it was always so grateful when people It's fun on stage laughing or some s**t like each other. That's what I can tell is the most fun. But he's so lovely. If you're just, he's just shows up with a f*****g plastic bag. It's a seven 11 person, right? You just got a small garbage bag. He to them As a wire hanging out or the greatest garbage I've ever lived. That's where I love about comics. It was like, no matter how great, if you're a real f*****g Comedy story comic, you're still just like who you are forever.


If you stay your tribe. Yeah. We were lucky as f**k. You know what? We were really, really lucky. And it's weird now, you know, like that night, when we were all hanging out to him, the comedy store documentary was so much fun, but it also was bittersweet because I left. When I was driving home, it was a real emotional, Why do you remember? I kept gripping and go and don't go. And I was like, so the conversation with a guy, it wasn't a kale that was overdosed in a f*****g kale. There's a lot of things like it's mental. I'm like, I'm a cloud b***h on my body has a clown. It's not meant to. And there's going to be an extra day on Whitney Cummings drugging female. Hi. I'm actually the pervious person in common. Listen, that was the only time in this whole COVID period that I thought maybe I shouldn't go.


This was the only time that was hanging out with you guys. It was like, okay, but I'm still going. But damn it. I was thinking I'm like, this is so rare. Like how many grown adults? Like once you get to a certain age, like you and you're in your thirties, your, with your friends, like you don't have that kind of a life. Well, you can go and be with your peers or is so unusual because people that go on the road, okay. If you go on the road all the time, it's just you in the people you go on the road, which you don't get to converge at a home base. And that's what this store is that what's so different because like, you'll be one place you'll be someplace. I will be not. And then where do we see each other on Tuesday? Like, ah, No, no time had passed. And also there I'm there, by the way, I'm there the whole time I'm working in the kitchen, chicken wings.


There's so many so crazy about this moment. Cause it's also like, I've never felt more loved and accepted than I had in the comedy store. I want, I never felt like myself. I never felt accepted. I always felt like I was walking on eggshells. I didn't know. I wasn't getting to know. Where do you feel comfortable? We hate you. <inaudible> the thing that you liked to be for the longest time. Oh, we should finish that story. So I do the, the roast battle. Whitney is one of the judges and Whitney was like RD p****d about something or something's every, woman's attacking my shiny as faze and saying that I had plastic surgery until the new product coming out. But I do, I am launching a line of FES oil. So that's so funny. Is this the perfect thing or my shiny face?


That's a f*****g face. It's a jelly, but you can also f**k you up. So she, so Whitney was like, Oh, she was like giving up her assessment of my side or whatever. And she was like, she goes she's. I just feel like he need to smile more. And I was like, I was like, smile more. I was like, what is this? The streets I'm like, I was like, and I was like in a hyper like fight mode. And I was like, smile more Well Street's of Albuquerque came out. Must be some f*****g stand up at no Philly suburbs of Philly at first. But Mmm. So, and then, but Whitney you texted me like the next, they were like, Hey, it's when you come in and I'm sorry if I offended you or whatever. I was like, why was like at the mall? I was like with me, I was like, can I take a break?


I was working at hot topic and I was like a famous person in the next to me. No, but you texted, man. It was like, so sweet was like, please don't cancel me. Please talk to a reporter know, but it was very nice. And then, and then I, like, I just texted you back and I was like, yeah, I'd just whatever out now. And I went one, we were at, when we were, you are judging. I went well Whitney I was molested in some and you're like, wait, we're all my less than that, I was worried that I was like silencing her because she was like, sorry, Whitney I'm a lesbian where they were so funny. This is why I love about You. One time we were talking in the back at The we were in the greenroom and on, in the main room and you go, we're talking about rape or something and you go and you go, you go, you go, I'm sorry.


I'm not listening to anything. You're saying, well, I'm just thinking why one of my favorite is shining. I'm like, Oh, you know the answer before. And then you texts me the next day or you call him and you're like, Oh, I'm so sorry. Where were you talking about being raved? And I started talking at my face. Like you come to a complete circle, you always handle your always working on whatever step that it is always working out. So no problems there. But I accidentally, I was like looking at the thing you had texted me. And I said something. I like, I actually sent a voice memo, two, you talking s**t on another female comedian like trashing a female comedian. And it sent the voice, my finger, him and I was so embarrassed because it was just listening to me talking s**t and another.


But you wouldn't of thought it was about, I said her name and everything, but it was just like so crazy that I was on voice memo on you being like this f*****g b***h. And then Voicemail. Was there an odd, cause its like, I don't have voicemail. Like if you call me a voicemail and just goes to f**k you, it just like goes into the ether, Geoff boy, voice that voice memos. It's like Right. It's a call back to the other night, tweet it anyway. Right. But of those voice memos that people send their odd. Cause you have to listen and say like, if you send me a text so I can go at eight 30, got it. We'll see ya. It always does the, the voicemails. I'm like it's because he doesn't want to put his readers on. Well, it's also when you send someone a voice memo and then you see that they kept it or you're like, why the f**k you keep that?


Oh, he can tell if someone has kept her saying that was the cutest use one sexy listening to experiment with What kind of mission? Impossible that they disappear. I liked it to go away. That's it? No, but I think it's more bonds. When you go, I feel like our text chains like comedians, text James. If they ever get out, we are all going to get cancelled. But it will be Was like, we should, all of these, there was one a week. So ridiculous. No, I just got to do famous. I'm like, are you guys we can text. Joe certain s**t. So I think he's gotten are overly famous or to the point where we can again, <inaudible> now it's like, yes.


Cause there are times where all like want to send somebody. I'm like, I have to know Joe's on this chain. Like I feel like he's just to be famous for this. You can see this. Shit's a gorilla sends me Jesus Christ. I played it yesterday for Nikki Glaser. Its this girl fisting herself in the most preposterous Way. Were you like what? Well this is there a way that is not. No, no, no, no, no. This, this is, this is a different place and real. Oh I'll show you a, We can put your entire know what it is. It's This it's putting all your fingers together. It's not like, Oh let's not go again. Jamie. You've been Festo and tell us, There you go. It's like your reactions for them. Hold on, hold on on your face.


Oh, hold on. Hold on. Oh my God. It's me. This girl. And you're acting. Yeah. Preposterous is the right word. Right? Well its going to hurt you punch in. They don't think it is by a bruised as a service. Anything that's f****d up like that. Tom is a girl. We'll send it to me. The opposite of having a baby. I know you guys have been the most f****d up s**t and I'm like, I'm so going to jail for this. No, no I think that's legal. I'm pretty sure that's legal. No, no it's not. You, you don't actually have, we have to be very clear or you don't actually get things that could send it to you now Have some wacky laws. What? That stuff. That's why they prosecuted certain like pornographers because they decided that it was, you know, that's where they prosecuted the two live crew, like it's fluid, Broward County, Florida.


Like they go after people is that there was one guy, it was a really famous case. And it really opened up a lot of people's eyes. In terms of pornography, there was this guy who was like known to be like ultra disgusting. Like the stuff they did was like super abusive. And like he would open up girls a******s like with a speculum and then p**s inside of them. And like crazy ICAN is always a good feel. Good if I'm being real, it's like a warmer is wrong, but It's and how much beer you had max hardcore. So that guy, so he was found guilty on 20 counts of obscenity by Tampa, Florida jury. And so they, they decide, they decide what's obscene and what's not obscene. It looks like they can make a distinction between regular pornography and what they decide is obscenity and it violates the law.


So they put him in f*****g jail. Jesus I'm like, just so I don't know if there was, you see, that's the thing it's like if your doing that kind of s**t, like, are you making people's signed releases or do they know that your going to do that kind of shut up? Right? The girl that's punching her fist in her p***y too, by the way, they feel like she could get out of jail. She could slide through her. She could like a slide through the end. She would kill it in jail. She'd be fine If I have to think like if you are, but then the, the other perspective is OK, what if this is your 18 year old daughter gets out of the Greyhound bus and meets this guy. And she has no idea what she's about to do. And she thinks she's going to do just like a sex movie. And this guy is p*****g in her eyeballs and, and, and punched her in their face.


Like there was all kinds of what, I don't know if he punched her, you know? No, not with the PGA its are going to be. Or do you think the PDF's are real? I just look here. Have you ever had a guy? I try to pass on, ya know, but I had, I had like one guy that I was like, it was like the guy that we weren't, we were just gonna like do the things that we've never done And we just end up not liking each other so we didn't sign again. But I was like, I would let you do the things you're never done. What? A kiss on the mouth. Yeah. We said, he said, I love you into my face. I can tell the truth on each other's numbers on their phones. I have a guy pee on me one day. He was like, really want to pee on me. And I was like, fine. And I started dying, laughing. Just the bathroom are in the bed, in the shower and the shower.


You know what people, you know, of course that's funny. They get on my phone. It was like supposed to be sexual. It was exposed to be sexual. And, and then the sheen from her face, <inaudible> a shade back on him. He was blind in by the mirror and that is my forehead. Like, you know how one water gets on Vaseline and just high damages retinol. And then as soon as it started, I could not stop laughing, Ruin the moment you made the moment. That's the only thing good about that moment was are you laughing in it? There's no ruining that way, But she's p*****g on your face. So funny or just the fact that he want's to do it like that the best way out as you making fun of them.


And I can't tell them guys are doing it because they've seen it in porn. Are there are actually into it. I know it's got to be like a pheromone or something. So why do they want to pee on us? Don't they don't want us to be out on the face. guys' really want to do. I think it's like a humiliation thing. They wanted to grade you. I now, If they want you to like it interesting want you to want them to do like you're so over the top crazy sexual that you like, think that that's why it exists in porn right now. But humiliation thing may be sometimes Sounds. But I think not always. I don't think it's just that. I think it's like, wow, great. No, I don't hate it. But then like once it happens, your like, this is like, here's the thing. If you're going to come on my face, you better not MIS you better do not make me wash my hair. Well, you better not to embarrass yourself if I don't want to have to Bob and weave together.


And they're like, Oh, you bet on Marshall. And all of a sudden, it's just weird what its like not enough and its disappointing and now I have to pretend like it's more definitely, definitely just to have their dogs. Katch it. That's it. Now that I'm that is just, I just thought of them. I know for sure somebody that's got to be it. Isn't that funny that like the, the amount of load is important, right? Well, I used to the same person that told me you can't recognize yourself on the street is David Blaine. It was a magic trick. I know, but I used to hear these women. There was a show on VH1, these like rock stars. wives' who would always make there husbands who are like touring on the road, come outside of them.


When they first came home, to make sure they weren't cheating because they thought they'd have or how much com they have. But that's not how it works. Cause that science, I liked that. I was think you should leave. If you want to see how much your husband jerks off, you should always leave the, the bill to tan lotion. Like put it into a lotion bottle, like a dark. It is a cookies who is a lotion. No, no, no. If you really need that, then we'll you have a STEM cells. I'm sure you have some sort of There's jerking off when its a compulsion and we need loops and, and you need to stick a vibrator up your ass and there's jerking off. Cause you were actually horny. No, I didn't know about this vibrant or of the ass thing. Well, you know I have a taser, the taste. She's just imagine if that No, they do that to the mules actually.


Well yeah, when they, when they want to extract sperm from them, they actually stick a cattle product or an a*****e and they just shoot. Oh my God. Yeah. And I know that because of a fear factor that someone's job now. Because if you're in fact we made people drink drunk. Did you ever drink the bad stuff? No, I didn't drink that, but I ate a bunch of things. I hate a cockroach of Madagascar. Jayant hissing, cockroach. I eat I'm a tomato. Oh destroyed. Is this? It just was all Chewie it all I know, but it doesn't taste bad. It's just your, it's a mind. F**k. Yeah. It's a mind. F**k. It's not, it doesn't taste bad. It's almost like taste less. No, but the legs are what get me, but it's basically a lot of stuff Or like a mobster is a buck.


It's not much different. Right? It really isn't it all just in your head. No. Cause we think of cockroaches as a lobster or the other day and I felt so bad. I was like holding it. I was trying to take a picture and I dropped it. And then when I picked it up, it was foaming and like s**t and p**s it like murdered it, this is fine. You have a fear factor that got canceled. <inaudible> they had to drink either. They have playing horseshoes and either they drunk a giant glass of donkey com or a glass of a donkey p**s. It's interesting. Like all of the men wanted to drink the donkey PIs. The girl's wanted to drink the com where you sit down. It was, We know cause right now. Yeah, No I know, but I thought it was stunning. Like these girls are drinking giant beer steins.


Of course I'm going to puke that belly button rings. They're so fun. You talked to him into it. So I know I'm talking to them through this. Well, they're doing it this way. This is where the, and this is where it got to the show canceled. Does it mean to When you said so far, but were the ratings bananas I've ever made it on the air because TMZ got a hold of this and TMC posted like someone from, I told him, this is the only T there's two times where I've told them don't do it. The people that were running the show one time was their bull riding. And they were like, don't worry. It's stunned bowls. When I go to their boat, does not know it's a stumble. That's a f*****g ball, man. Well, I saw the animal that these people got out. And one of them was the girl who was like, she was like 95 pounds. And that f*****g bull launched her through the air.


Like she didn't exist like, like a pillow. And You said I'm mad at her for being 95 pounds. And that kind of glad that you got hurt. No, the, the heel of the bull as he's kicking that the hook barely mr. Head, Jesus is like this. Like, wow, this is like within a foot of her head. Like if it kicked her in their head who the f**k knows it would've happened. So this is one where I told these people my due not f*****g do this. That's crazy. Is this the girl? And see how close I can do to her head. She was really hurt you. F**k up her back. She land. Well, She wanted to really badly hit her. Mister is the back of the Hamm is what slapped in to her. Luckily I don't think that hurt or a nearly as bad as a whole foot have heard it.


Right. A cracked my elf For falling off of horses. That was just, that was honestly her life rolling the dice. She was tough as f**k she got. And she was okay. She's a tiny girl, but I know Tom does it last year, a b***h is getting she's very pretty. I hope she's a very spell it Do. It is a fear factor is like the beginning of the inner. It was like, what? I mean like if it was such, it was the first time. Like it, it was the, it was like, TV never could come back from it. Like nothing could compete with it. After that, except the internet. It was there. That was as far as they could take it to far. That was NBC. Let me, that was where it is. As far as the could take a donkey com.


I remember walking into the office going, what are you talking about? And there going this, what they're gonna do, they're gonna play horseshoes. I go, is there a way that they can get out of drinking and totally give a look at the ghetto? Like if they land, what is it? Horseshoe. When you get a shoe, what is it can get the point. What is when you hit the thing that sticks and the idea that was the goal. I'm like, is it possible if they get the job? If they ring around in the horseshoe, if that one, No, I'll call her, bring her around the corner. Is it possible that they could drink nothing? And they said, no, Dan, you have to only drink like eight ounces. I'm like, this is crazy. Beastiality rape situation where you're forcing them to swallow. The sexual is also a wild amount of calm, A wild animal people. You keep getting canceled for like doing blackface and s**t.


But the network signed off on it. You're like, why? Why is it the person's fall? If I know how that works, it's on SNL. It's like how many people had to sign off on that? I'm going to make it happen. Like 200 people said, sure. Around a bunch of crazy. Fuck's like the comics of the store. And then one person says, I think you can do it. You're like we can do it. Yeah. We are not a f*****g people to be talking to about that. But even then I was telling them not to do it. I was like, don't do this. Listen to me when I'm the voice of reason, we're f****d. I'm like, this s**t is f****d. You cannot have me telling you you're going to far. And they were like, well, I think you're wrong. This is fine. I need to calm. Did that go to you? This is all mental. It's all mental. No, they did. And they were laughing and even peers. Oh yeah.


Afterwards I saw so many people puke like a stunning amount of people puke. No, that there is contagious puking. Where if you see one person puke, you automatic. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. I used to get it really fear factor cured me. Have it. Whoa. When I was in high school, if a kid puked in the hallway, I just don't know puking is that it's because there is something wrong. Like maybe even a bad food and you're with that person. So maybe you ain't that bad food to, and your body is like, Oh, let's just, let's not take any risks and lets just throw this s**t up. Yeah. It was actually explain to me by someone who knows what that, and they said that what it is like your body is trying to purge it because he's like, Oh, this person is thrown up. There can be a bad bug or you know, I could have eaten some bad food and you just block, you just want to grow up to, Have you ever been thrown up on?


Yeah. Yeah. People hit me. Like he hit my feet and s**t. A pure factor. Who knows how many people I puked on the whole cast of the real world road rules challenge in Santa Fe. Once I got So hammer. Do you remember these to do that? Then we would like have all the old alumni com or were you on that show? I know I was living in, so it was a go go dancer in Santa Fe and I, that's not stripping by the way, but I love the show. So I couldn't believe all the people coming into town. I was like, it's such a small town. So it was like, Holy s**t. We had a lot of celebrities like Sam Shepard and like all these people. But I was like, f**k that. I want to hang out with a road, the road rules, Ken. So I was so excited, but I got the flu. So instead of not going out, I just chugged DayQuil. And then I was drinking like a white Russians because I was like 20, you know?


So I puked like this. Milkie <inaudible> all over them. And it just happen to be a day that they weren't filming. But I know I puked all over them and I'm like, why was it not being filmed? I can get my first TV Oh s**t. And that I was thinking about it. I was, it was funny because later in that week I was at a bar and all the people where there, but at the producers and stuff and the producers were like, so what's your story? And I realize they were like, this is crazy. B***h has got to be in the real world, but they had to wear like this. She's going to tell him that. They're like, well yeah, this f*****g guy is puck. Oh my God PUK is he dead? All the people on there was like one guy at a time, Its in the beginning of the first ones, they become famous then.


And then you just caste out into the world and they have no talent, A reality stars. I remember one time a friend of mine was at a restaurant in Charleston, South Carolina. And one of the famous girl's from the real world is a waitress and one of the restaurants, but it took a picture, sent it to me and I was like, Oh of course they didn't pay them anything. Yeah. They were famous and broke. You remember? There was a place that John and Kate plus eight, the John Guy, he was working at like a regular job. Yeah. People wouldn't leave them alone. Like, you know, I'm sure now he's okay. But I remember I was in Hawaii once with my family and we went to this ice cream place and they were like, John and Kate were just here taking the time. This was back when I was a show, a lick when it was on television.


It's a weird kind of fame. Yeah. You know, because they were really famous and now they're not, well, it just stopped Do a little bit half of it too. I think. Cause we're ourselves on stage were not, none of us are really that much of characters I would say But. Yeah. But without the impractical jokers, when I hang out with Soule, from a practical to people come up and they think they know him because of his personal, they put out they'll be like, shout, like DEC hymn. I'm like Jesus Christ just at the movie's like chill. That's how we do. You need to it. Right. And so, but yeah, I'd get that a lot too. And I was doing the row's for sure. Or people come up to you and be like, Hey can be like Jesus it's as far as it's like two 30 at the airport, We have panicked. When I met famous people and put my foot in my mouth and seemed like a moron.


When I tell you what I did after I did your show, we talked about survivor and I ran into Jeff props. It's a lot is my favorite show. Every time I'm on your show, I will tell the millions of people to keep watching survivor its numbers, to do a show called sexual assault, survivor, sexual assault, trauma bonding. Also, I was molested, but so no, but I ran into him at a coffee bean and he's my guy. He's the person I freak out about. And I know that's like nerdy, but I love the show so much of it. Yes. That's where I met him. He like you met him at coffee bean. Oh really? Yeah. I drug name-dropped you so f*****g fast because I was being such a psycho that I needed him to know that I had some sort of stake in Hollywood. I was like, I'm a Comedy right.


My name is in the wall. I just talked about you on Joe Rogan pocket. And he goes, Oh I love Joe. It was like, come on the show. And I was like, I'm a psycho I can it's like I can do is like everyone is a psycho when I was like, no, You bet you want and what have you made a million dollars? That's my feet. I know that's right. No, no, no, no, no. I just have a bit where I don't feel my feet and I just can't end it further. Never seen her Instagram. Did you meet? Oh my God. Whitney muted me. What is it on Instagram? Even the picture that she took when she was on the show, the first time you see pixelated, she just got a foot up in the end. Right. But yeah, it was just like a fish. It just like a bit now forever. There was only, but for some reason, I think he's like my first Google search. His Whitney Cummings feet. Yeah.


Well that's where every girl that's ever lived. It's not me. No, not faced is how the body, it's not common. What makes on line? The really like dark in the basement freaks are the ones that are in defeat. Right? What do you want us to finish it? If someone was saying that was something about like, because babies, they crawl around and their model is like, your mom's are a barefoot. And what I know of it, which I don't I'm I who knows, but it is. It's like the They a guy was doing a Phantom limb study. And he said that when he was checking the brain that the neuropathways that go from your brain to your feet or next to the ones that go to your genitals. So he thinks that that would got mixed in some people are interested that it was something about seen as a kid. You see your mom's feet so much when you're so tiny and you've you guys really are buying your mom's.


It's a really weird it's. So in my dad, The interesting thing about the book, talking about Freud and the cocaine thing with Freud that young people back then when Freud was doing Coke, they didn't think that addiction was for intellectuals. They thought brilliant people can get addicted in the hilarious, like literally he thought he could take Coke with abandon. And if we find, because that's a mental weakness and he would never have a mental weakness, Think about it a lot though. All of that, people like B how's get all of the people that are brilliant. And you'd like, if you look at me and they were so f****d up and I always struggle with that word, I'm like Picasso, all of its kind of like I watched the masterclass of David Lynch and he was like, I go outside.


I can do it today. So he goes, he's like, I go outside. When I write my best writing is done. When I do, I have a legal note pad, I go outside, I drink wine and I smoked cigarettes and I was like, so close to smoking cigarettes again, I got nicotine toothpicks because I was like, maybe I'll be brilliant. Like if I smoke cigarettes, it's like, do we need that? And I don't know. I know I do think there is a certain, like a ability to risk and be self. Like I'll smoke A cigarette sometimes. And I'm like, ah, f**k it. Like, f**k you do need to fix it. Mentality you to take risks on stage, to stay out till two in the morning and jeopardize yourself and your own life. There is value in booze. There's a value and pot. There's a value in mushrooms is a value in those things. But it's 30 and it's not necessarily the whole thing.


Like I think people can write brilliant s**t and be stone cold sober. It's just, it's a focus thing. Like you can talk your mind into a psychedelic state. So I mean, that's what the holotropic breathing and meditation. Do you know that I do breath work all the time. I do. I've been treating this quarantine like, because these are my probably love years. No, it's my eat. Pray. Love you. Is like I should be in India, f*****g a Sherpa. I should not be trapped in my house. So I do breath with it Or in the Himalayas. All my head. Do you always do we get it? You read the headlines. I just wanted to save you from being cancelled in the polls. It gets their news from him for awhile. I just read you your Instagram.


I know Jeff probs and Joe Rogan right. No probs wanted to be on the show, but I'm not ready for it. Yes. Wait let's do you want do it again? No, no. What I'm saying to you? I'm doing You. I was doing you like Jeff probes. Want me on the show? You shouldn't do it. Don't they have like couple survivor, like friends, survivor. We can't do it together, but we are so annoying. Do the fact that I could get more annoying, but I do think convenience. We do have a like grit. Like I do think we could win. Oh yeah. I'm going to f*****g psycho is going to make sure we do have like a certain level of grit and also the exoskeleton, right? No manipulation. I mean that's right, Right. Yeah. It's about like being a pathological liar.


Well, it's also, but not a liar. Don't like that. You guys are both. Listen, anybody. Who's a comic as God had some damage when you're young and then you see vulnerabilities in people, you see things to complain about. Like you would find their weaknesses, you get two or both predators. You would see where they're f****d up in your life. Well, that's what we had to do on a f*****g at home. You had to learn how to put Gille and manipulate it and charm people. And, and you know, it's what I like, how our trauma landed us a different land. You know what a good guy all means. I'm like, what are you? No b******t. No b******t. Seriously. You guys should, 100% have a show together. You guys would like, you know, there's like guys, we f****d and call her daddy. There's all these couple of girls. So if you guys would Dom men, Nate, that s**t that's the two of you would f*****g Dom and Nate, that s**t, the two of you together would have the number one podcast on planet earth.


Should we try to eclipse? Joe Rogan No, no, you shouldn't. You're 100%. I could do it. You would get all the girls. All of them are all of them. <inaudible> You are both like bad-ass chicks, but you're not you, even though you have been, victims are not victims. As you talk honest, your comics, your boat, Dan and gorgeous t**s are a really incredible, We are both legit comics. Yeah. Like you to get there, like that would be a F*****g monster combination and I'll help you. I'm busy. I'll get it. I'll do whatever the f**k you want. But do you guys in the s**t? I think you could do it Also by the way, because I just started my podcast.


Do you have your podcast on my bucket is like, I now have time for another one. Now that I've done the pockets. And if I sort of I'm like, Oh, you can't do it. You can do it. Then we had some plan because here's the thing that I know. We got to figure out how to get somebody to watch you like Hawks. Right? Do you have an actual, You guys have they keep a Navy seal? The guys on staff don't bring another one. No, there isn't. I love it. Annie so much. And our relationship so much is that I feel like I don't see people disagree any more. No one will tolerate anyone that disagrees with them in any way. People just want to align with people at the end. It's like a f****n echo chamber circle, jerk of life. We agree. We agree. We were like Andy and I can't disagree and f**k with each other. Like, and we still respect each other and love each other and have different points of view.


And I just Ari and I disagree about 80% of the day. If we go back and forth, you're like, don't be seeing her ball's right now. Let me put them away. <inaudible> No, it is with most friends. You're supposed to be like that. Like if you're married to your ideas, to the point where they're your identity and you, you can't be challenged get, well, not only is that like your ideas and ideas, not first of all, it's just an idea. It's not even yours is just an idea. Yeah. And if someone doesn't agree with it, why is it personal? But it is, it is for most of us, most of the time it's taken me for forever to try to beat that down. When I haven't, I have a totally beaten down, but have it to the point where I recognise Oh, attached to this, lets just look at it for what it is.


It's not me, not this idea. But so many people is like, and this is what we're seeing with politics in the, the biggest way possible. It's insane. It's not true. The democratic party as you like, do you have to win? Yeah. You know what I mean? It's not just these ideas. It's not just an election fighting over the masks too. They politicized that If you made it like this part or their identity, they're like watching it for me, Masks on their avatar. F**k. Yeah. Out of how you look at it. But also I get annoyed when I, cause I'll do live streams and stuff for my car or not when I'm driving, but I'll have my mask on ever and be like, why are you? And I'm like, I don't, the mask means so little to me, it means so much to other people. It means so that I don't notice that its on. Right. I didn't remember.


That's good. Their toes is really big. <inaudible> It's more flattened touches my face. Cause you got I'm sorry. I'm so cool. I'm pretty, nobody wants to punch me in the face. I want to do a joke that I couldn't do. I was going to maybe do it on a talk show, but about memory in the prison, inmates were being real. Yeah. Yeah. And ah, I want to do something about that. Like imagine the warden, giving that speech of like telling the prison inmates that they were about to be released to me. I'm like, Hey, you guys, a couple things changed, you know, have to wear masks at all times. Cover your faces at all times. And the police have been defunded go. So you got a of weeks. I know. But the one guy who got released, the one guy who got released and then murdered the woman who accused him of rape.


Yeah. Immediately. That's when she got released. I don't don't even know if it's because you got a mass because that's what he was going to do. If he got out. I don't know if you raped her. I don't know what really happened. But he definitely murdered her. Allegedly. He was claiming that it was a false accusation and he got out of jail and murder. Terrifying. They are releasing violent criminals. It's not just, it's not just like people in jail for, for Coke. Right. You wear and they get to wear masks all day. I mean, you look at these ring, cameras are the security cameras, but I'm like, well every once in a mosque. So how much what I do, I was thinking like with the looting, like we couldn't have loo like they have no enough of it. Do you recognize people? And to see their eyes, I'd see people mass. When I go, it's weird.


How much I can recognize someone just from that point. So I was always like, it would be so embarrassing to get caught loose. Like I'm like you walk in with an Apple watch and they're like, is that that's a Butler. Jake, Paul got caught Jake Paul on a camera and you know, masks, camera, this camera or no did he really? This is it. It was his brother. Was it? If you had to just go, well, did you see this? The mayor shutdown that ticked out. How's that going so far? When you say is that that they pulled the electricity. Electricity. Yeah. That is a weird thing to do. Look, I'm not saying that they shouldn't tell these people. They shouldn't have parties and spread it all over the place because they definitely are spreading it. Like I'm a doctor Malkin.


One of the guys have treated us treated more than a hundred people that went to that party. And I think somewhere in the neighborhood of almost half of them had COVID Jesus. I was like, these people are going to these giant parties in their six people at the party and your drinking and your 20 And. You don't know what the f**k you're doing, Sharon. Yeah. You 24 years old hammer. Your family is exactly the grandpa dies. Right. Right. My dad is 79. I want to say my dad is so badly as in Philly, but he doesn't want to see, you know, honestly like he's so he really is Whitney it's so sad. Like he's like, Nope. And I was like, Nope, but what if I kept, I was like, I'll drive out I'll camp and all like I'll get tested before whatever. And he was like, he's like, no. He's like, because he's just so he just doesn't want it.


He doesn't want it. And I'm so happy. He's like that. But I'm like, but dad, can I hang out with our Podcasts it wouldn't be called your daddy and me. We called her daddy's they didn't have to pick up daddy's are answering Daddy. Didn't do a good job. That job with daddy. One more. Turn our call. You imagine if you had a podcast called daddy, didn't do a good job. My dad, but it is. And he's like, he's like, well, bring me up today. My dad goes, bring me up to that. I go, Oh, are you sure you want me to go? Oh, well maybe not. I mean, I honestly don't want to play when I'm so grateful at all of the mistakes my parents made because it made me like I am equipped to do in so many ways that so many of my friends have had good childhood's aren't and I could just like sorts s**t out with adversity was so boring with a comfortable life because you met the most, the most f****d up people.


I now have married parents. They all have all these f****d up expectations. Married. It was bad when I was a kid there. Now I was at like this, like now, even though everything was f****d up and I possibly could have been sold into sex work at some point. Yeah, it was a very close. You shouldn't go for that. I know. Yeah. Hiding under the car. Holy s**t. That's it. We were like one of the good ones. That's the baby one. People with paying a high school. My high school, literally they all f****d us. Like all the teachers when it just came out and another teacher got called with kiddie porn. It, it was a school, but my graduating class was 17 kids. There were seven Detroit like, come on now. My drama teacher gave one of the students aides. I found that out later, how you bond trauma bond are now. You're just like, maybe that's what you guys called.


Trauma dude. That's actually for a trauma bond better. So I don't, but I, but with my parents, I always think like they are they're good now. Like why, who cares about the past? Like they were so loving and sweet and awesome that it's like when people make mistakes. Exactly. In the past, they came with the tools they have. And I know, You know, how many of us she was 21. She didn't know what the f**k she was doing. How long it was. Her birthday gave her shots. There's no way you are going to do a good job with it. There may be 21. I mean, it's just so hard. Right? Your dad's is such a, I don't know my dad. Yeah. He didn't come out of the woodworks when it was like, alright, You haven't spoken to him since I was seven years old.


Yeah. I have the same name as him and he's Joe Rogan you're a junior. I know I have a middle name. Yes. You know, reached out to try and get a cut. Have all, this is not so much. You got your smarts from your mom, I guess. Do you think he's alive? Oh yeah. He's alive. Wow. Yeah, my mom's Mark that's my mom's family is a very smart, very, very intense people. Yeah. Yeah. I couldn't tell me. What's your lineage? Mostly Italian. A little bit of Irish. And so my, yeah, my biological dad's father was from Ireland. Every body's from Europe. Everybody was all my, my parents on both sides. All the family was all first generation immigrants.


Do you like Ireland? I've never been. And I know that's not true. I've been to Dublin for UFC and I was in Belfast. I was in Northern Ireland as well for UFC. I know Ireland's some times. Do you feel like, I, it seems like you feel more of a calling to Italy. Wow. That's the family. I new, you know, I'm certainly some sort of a European mutt with a, a Italian and, and there's some African, I get some African in their, and some of the small amount of Asians We heard you had a little Africa <inaudible> didn't know what that means, but I'm shocked. We, we haven't gotten canceled. Right. But that's, it it's a real, like mostly I'm Italian and Irish. But if you look at some people like a, it wasn't Conan O'Brien they found it was like a hundred percent Irish, which I have never seen anything like this.


Yeah. That really makes sense. Yeah. Interesting. When you find out like where your ancestors came from, like this, I love, I have 1% Asian. I'm like, where's that When the eyes are very, that's just get the space. Now it's being hi. Jane has content Kind of guy f****d. So many people had some preposterous amount of DNA with it. No like 20% of people or descendants of his or something wacky like insanity. Have you ever seen or read or listened? Listened to the other two? Dan Carlin's hardcore history. Its an amazing class and had a whole series called the wrath of the Khan on Gaviscon. And it f*****g blew me away.


The guy killed 10% of the population of a planet earth while he was alive people and Kobe translate to 0.5% of the male population of the world or roughly 16 million descendants living today. How many of those descendants have f****d each other? Nearly eight years, Percent of the men living in the region of the form of a Mongol emperor, Kerry, the Y chromosomes that are nearly identical to him. That means he 8% of the f*****g people today that live in that region have his genes. That's how many people, that guy You should have done that on fear factor. You have to just swallow his com. This is really all it comes to the kimchi, the bird I want to know because my ancestry is a scotch.


Irish came through West Virginia coal miner's and there were a lot of Italian coal miners actually. Yeah. While people did what they are had to do, but you guys are cousin's that's the thing about our world today. It's wi the jobs that our, that suck today, you know, they, they still suck. Like there still are people that coal mine, but it's not what most people are doing when they come over the, the, the, the whole scratch and claw that the immigrants had. Like my grandparents had those people that came here, like straight off the boat. Right. That is, that's why New Jersey in New York was so hostile because the Echo's of those as well. No, it was because Joey was coming back. <inaudible> ancestral trauma.


Yeah. That's I always had this bit about California than everybody. Like God, as far as they could, and one f*****g don't want to live in Hawaii. So they just stay right here. It's like, you're trying to get away from everything that was on the East coast. If somebody is so specific about the personality type here, there's something just b***h in the DNA, this area. Well it's people want attention. They want attention to it really, really badly. And if they don't get it, they think someone's doing them wrong. That's it? Your sensitive a culture. And I mean, I guess its a lot of people to come out here to pretend for a living, very emotional people. Yeah. Well a lot of that and you, your coming out here, even if its not to pretend to coming down here to get famous. Wow. I just feel like if you do get famous, like a certain type of famous you've now come into this club where they were like, all right, you're not going to your no longer are going to be exactly who you are.


And especially with actors, I feel like your job is to play someone else to go. You're not going to have any personal opinions. You're going to keep our secrets. So you were going to like your a puppy's kids, adrenaline up were going to take their blood and we're going or whatever they do nothing. But you know what? It, it does feel like you are agreeing to be a part of the art we're gonna let you in, but you have to not embarrass us. Like have to keep it. Yeah. That's really interesting. And, and, and it's interesting because I'm seeing so many actors now that are like becoming activists and I'm like, is that just because you've played a doctor on T V you'll think you can not be, they're not getting any attention to the attention. You can go to the CET. So there is no movies, there's no TV show. So what do they do? They panic. And they make these black and white videos about how they're going to take responsibility.


And they're not gonna And there doing its own. Actory they're doing it in a character disgusting. Like I'm going to act like I care about this. I'm going to act like I Prepared. So like it's a, That's what they do. I know I'm seeing all these celebrities post with a Kamala Harris. I'm like, do you know that it's going to do the opposite of what you think it's going to make America eight or nine. You wanna make America to realize that the Khan is on you're a part of it Were with Hillary. Everyone's vote for Hillary or you're an idiot. They're there we go. Yeah. You know what Joe told me about you that I forgot to ask you the last time I was here. What did you have Parana, right. At some point, yes. What was that? I I'm a problem. That's <inaudible> Yeah.


He's two. Well, I'll give you one better. At one point in time, I had an outdoor courtyard at my house and I was seriously considering glassing it in and getting some, a crocodile monitors and feeding them rabbits. I had this whole plan and I talked to an architect who just moved to Florida, was going to have a glass in like this terrarium in the middle of my house. And I was gonna put tropical plants in there and like have sprinklers. So it sprays water and, and keeps having a good, healthy environment. I was going to Let wild kingdom take place in my backyard. But they told me it's a real problem with the rotting of the cor. The carcasses is like you a feed rabbits to these are the s**t.


And then you gotta clean it up and you cannot really go in there. So you'd have to hire someone to come in and like Russel the f*****g monitors because they are big. If you ever see in a crocodile monitor, it's a terrifying look and creature. I have this idea As like a monitor or to watch the <inaudible> Large scary lizard and is because I had the piranhas and I would by the gold type stuff, Tim Dillon, that's not. So you had like a person, a guy who's the cat, some pain. Right. But that's not a really good picture of that's it that's it. Right? They're that one, the yellow one in the middle. That's what? It looks like it. Yeah. And they get f*****g big. They get big like six feet And they can kill you. I mean, it's not going to be a fun rest.


Take a bill, take a bite out of your I'm going to clamp down and run in one day, there was this guy. It was a smaller, when was like this big and it was yellow. I don't know what his is. Maybe one of the, a little dragon was that lady that's one of the top I was playing with it like that. And then I was like, I saw later at the comedy store was like, you know that those could bite your face off. Do they do bike? People sometimes knows off, but you can't predict what a large lizard is going to decide if it doesn't like it. F*****g cool though, that looks like a T Rex. I look at that. I'll take a dinosaur. It's a g****m Raptor. He's gripping you like Mike Binder did it. I don't know when I became like the person that you touch when you want to say something offensive.


Why the funding things that I've ever seen on the safe don't suck me into this. I've got up and moved seats. What's that? Oh, you f****d up and moved. See it's and then you were the closest one. I don't know why Well I thought Rogan should be in the middle. Do you guys have a tick tock house together? No, we just do it without electricity were like, f**k, this I'm going to live with it. We were like, we're Whitney. Like you can do that. You could have a tic dock house. What if I can do that kind of money? You can have her rent. I have kind of been doing that in the corner, you know, have sort of been like, like Tim Dylan's been staying with me, Esther. I make Annie came over. I just like, I want to start like a coven of calm. Yeah. Well, I mean, like we're saying, like that's what we miss the most.


We wanted to be a harem belt. We're all trying to pick a finger or, you know, I can't speak for an answer, but I can just go pee on it and we're good. Now I do. I start a podcast in my house. I have a pocket studio we could do at out of my podcast or to do with my students with it is my goal is to make Annie Rich's f**k. And just watch it go completely and say, I love it. Oh, you think she'll be OK. Being rich. Yup. Yeah. I think so. You are going to give it all to like your ex-boyfriend's any way you're going to say I've actually stopped doing that. I actually stopped paying for it. I've gone, bro. Rogan you we're. This was when you had to give me a hundred dollars bills. We're in the, we were in the parking lot and I go, I'm standing next to Rogan right?


And I'm like, we're friends. We do the same thing. Obviously he's been doing it longer them and everything. But how do you do the same thing that we are parked in the same parking lot? Or can you teach me out to be rich? Because I live in that car. That's one of your 60 car's or something that you started laughing in my face. You're pulled out of money. Again. This means nothing handed me for $300 bills tried to do I try and give you money. But I thought it would be weird out a relationship. Well, you know, once you want your money, every time we saw her, he would like slap me a high five, but then it got weird because I thought you thought I was showing up to get money. But then as you do, remember when you said I was worried, we were going to think that I know. No, no, no. I never thought that it was fun. It was a fun, little gag, right? With you.


You said this is the funniest bit ever. Oh, we should do more like a man, but it gets funnier. The more money it is. But you, you told me two, you are like, if I could handle the people that are, because I love watching you get attacked by fans. It's one of my fate when they approached, because they see them getting nervous. You could see them to profit from fighting uncomfortable and you see them coming. And I watched it. You are being cool. You're being cold. You're very nice. You're a fan friendly. But they are just having such a moment. They can't get over themselves. They were like freaking out. So I always like, and I've told you that you go, I'll give you a hundred dollars to get people away. You don't know what I want to get away. But then I started body checking people. You're like, that's my friend. And I was like, Oh s**t, I'm hungry.


I'm on there. <inaudible> dude. When someone comes up to Rogan like, you see them circling like a f*****g Barracuda or you're talking to Rogan you see just people circling. For some reason, they always want to show you a video. Now they have more of their unfolding, a paper. Then they always have something cued up for you to walk. You know, I gotta show you something in and, but you handle it really well. You do it without hurting their feelings. Some of your size. I try and do this Jedi mind check where you're like, no thanks, man. Like you make that. That'd be very nice, but it's an odd thing. Look at it. But like I said, it was its OD. When I meet, when I met Bordain while the first thing it says, my wife says to my boyfriend does look. The first thing I say, that's so funny and she's not going to meet your boyfriend.


No, that she thinks that she's just being funny. And I said it to him and he's like, Whoa. I'm like, Oh, not a comic. You're a guy with a thump. So sexy dude, dude, just a great, great guy. He's so, so fun to hang around with. I really enjoyed the chair of that Or article I sent you that other girl, Leah makes money. Right. When I started, then it was like, Oh, that was it. Upsetting. Yeah. Yeah. What about, what about burden? She was just talking about like the toxic, why was it before he had died or was it after he died or that she wrote out she was right. She was writing about toxic femininity during the me too movement, which was like a breath of fresh air. Right? Thank you. And what she was talking about of Sierra Genta and Rose McGalin and the stuff with Anthony Bourdain and how f****d up a was.


But she just she's really, she's cool. She's on the New York. Housewives is very real way. It was sort of a, about him and now, but it was all send it to you. It's a, it's a really good article. There's a toxic people out there. You know, that's what the problem is. If you get into this hole, believe all women thing or believe all men thing or believe all trans people can eat all, anybody you're gonna, you're gonna run into people that are juke in the system. You have to run at a toxic person. And that people that say believe all of this person at the same time, it's also at the same people to go. You can generalize about all people. He's like, well, why is it? So they're trying to rope you into complicit that you have to comply. Then if they're saying, believe all, anything you must comply. That's what they're doing. They're playing a game with you. And it's not a rational one.


It's not of that. I've thought this through. And this is the best way as a sensitive nuanced person, we should approach this. We should look at it with an open mind. They're not saying that. Thank believe all, anything, believe it or anything Disrespectful to like real victims. It's like, I always hated the hatch. Like I always would joke how to go, the me to move. And the hashtag bothers me cause its like, here's like I have a girl who I got in a fight with who her argument was. She goes, you don't understand what the me too movement was the only one in this group of girlfriends that has actually had actual assault happen, you know, and sat in court and stuff and like really handled this <inaudible> they are willing to break the laws to touch you to do the right thing, you know?


And it's like, so it was like, I do think I am an a, I have a good perspective on the stuff and I, and My and she goes, that's not what we're fighting for. The me too movement is about why. When I go to the comedy club, did the male comics kiss me on the cheek and not the other guys. And I'm like, this, what? So that's this is what I said, this is This part of the hashtag. And then it's like real rapes are no way. This is real rapes. And then this is that part. Right? And then there like trying to go like, look at me. Some of that sweet, real rape. I watched some of that real rage. Give me some of that attention trying to get there. Like you can't group at all together. No, that's not. You know that a comic not kissing his friends on the cheek, but kissing me on the cheek As your words until they don't want them to hit you on the cheek.


It's not the same as getting like that. We all know some people we could hug each other. Right. We hug each other. Wouldn't in it. Some people don't hug. Don't know him that well, but don't hug him. But if I can As a hug, it's because I love you. That's why I'm hugging you. But it's not it's everything's context. It's like, it's like, I have never felt weird around Joe Rogan hugs. Cool. Then someone holds on too long, You know like yikes. Or they squeezed your back or something. You put it on your lower back or touch your neck. And there's this one girl with the comedy store. I want to say, I need distinguishing features because they don't want you to don't want to know. I don't like being, Oh you can't right now. You can't just say a little s****y things. And when did, because their like be cancelled it, but here's what I will say. A it's like calling the cops on a blog, you can't do it anymore.


We are going to get still going to get killed. Like I cannot be like, Oh wow. It was so funny. When that one comment, grab my ass, you know? Like you cannot say, but I know, but I mean, it's interesting because it's like, when I do I always add context and go like, you don't get to decide what my experience would. That person was. If someone is back my ass and I thought it was funny, I get to decide that you don't get to decide how it affected. Right. You know this like self righteous indignation in this, like forcing me to have the experience you want me to have just so we can't hit some adrenaline junky, like Twitter fight. Like you don't get to decide how it affected me. You know? So it's like women use your voices and speak up. But if you say something I don't like, So you get bloated, you get blow back. Cause you're like, well slowing the progress of outrage. You like hit the brakes on an outrage.


Cause you were like, I'm not outraged. They are like, well you should be outraged when we could use You you could be a part of the outrage puddle, Wait about a lot of things that you know, but I have not going to lie in bartend. I'm outraged about things and I'm not outraged about it. You know, You are allowed to have your own interpretation, have any experience. Like if, if you have a bunch of friends and all of you run up and smack each other in the ass for me to see each other, that's a thing you guys have decided is okay, Stop liking him. Go. I don't like that anymore. Right. Right. And if someone does it and then you say they don't like it, they should apologize and they should never do it again. And you, so I'm sorry. I thought we were doing that. What was it like? Apologies. Don't work anymore. I'm actually doing, I'm doing like a limited series.


Podcasts with Bonnie MacFarlane about it called cancellous next Tuesday son. So please be on it. But we're canceling different things each time. Like I want you to do, to cancel romance because everything's like molesting and romance. Now I was dating a guy who is 30 and he asked every, he said, can I take off of your bra? Can I kiss? You know, I think I'm too old to even understand this new dynamic as a teacher. When though when you're like, can I go to the bathroom? Or like, Oh you mean, may I at least say right? But yeah, no, it's really weird. I think like the new sex sound, instead of like slurping and suctioning is going to be, is going to be to body cameras, just like clicking against each other.


Cause we all need to record on both sides. No f***s. I know you have to set up a camera in the room. That's all you do Legally pretty well. You just like everyone else to do. You have to do like, listen, we can do this, my service with my own hands. And then it will be cameras everywhere. And think that was your sternum. I was in A. I was in Houston like a year and a half ago when I was running like a new hour that a lot of it was about the me to stuff, you know, trying to keep it in context. Like a lot of this stuff shouldn't be reduced to a tweet or a f*****g op ed or whatever. So I was trying to really like dimensionalize it and I'm in Houston. I go on stage and I'm I'm, I'm sort of like take them arguing both sides, which is what comics kids were. We play devil's advocate. And I said something that about like a guy that had smacked my ass and work or something.


And I was like, yeah, that shouldn't have happened. That was sorta my take on it in this is a woman on the front row. I just went girl, take the complement and move on to just be like, people have different takes on this is a little bit true. And so I was, I have been walking, trying to walk five miles a day just thinking and going through s**t and come up with ideas. And I was walking with like my Fanny pack. I'm sweating. I'm like s**t, you guys do. They like the crazy sunglasses. They were the least hot thing on the world. And I get this beat from this like beat up Corolla, you know, from like the eighties. And this guy like rolls up and he just start whacking is the deck. It's like fairly like, its like barely hard. Like you stop bragging on this bike. I guess what I'm saying. I stepped out. We get it.


Even when I'm out to them. No, no I just cannot help themselves. I have so many are a range of emotions because then he had like a baby seat in the back when I was like, Whoa, what's going on here. Right. But then like I was just thinking right. Was like, I went through this range of emotions and that I was like, you know, one day I will miss this. I do think for real, Nobody is going to be a challenge for a lot of guys do that. The old ladies tell me No, but also like you have forever. There are times guys have done something like that. Like grabbed me in a way that is ostensibly seems really weird and it hasn't made me feel uncomfortable. If there is time, someone will come with a common story to say absolutely nothing. Look at me a certain way. And I'm like, something's off about that price and got you're a band or you know, You are allowed to have that in guys are allowed to have that too.


There's some women that you're be around, you know, I gotta get the f**k away your sins or they'll grab you. Well, how about bill for his bit that he had in his last special paper tiger about a comic who is a very prominent feminist comic whose slapped him in the ditch as he was going onto the stage, they were swapping positions and he was going on the stage and she was coming off and she slapped. Right. And they're all of these. There are so many I'm trying to like really for my next special work on like the way that we are sexist towards men, because it was just no one talks about that. I heard that you're I'm Andrew Huberman on my podcast. The other day is a brilliant neuroscientist who is like working on this thing through your eyes and all of the 70 comes on and I'm like, he's on my podcast. And I'm like, God, you're so hot. You're hot. And I'm really sorry if this was reversed.


If a podcast hosts had a female scientist On and be like your high, your sexy good for a site is they wouldn't go to jail. I know I should be. I'm sure. I'm like, I honestly it like, I'm like, I think under these guidelines I have raped in a bar. Like, But here's the difference. The difference is for sure. Right when I was going to explain it. Yeah. Superman is a gorilla. Well, he he's a big dude. He's a big 230 pound man. Like he can't say that to you that way. If he was the comedian and you are the scientists, it would be threatening to you. You're not threatening him by saying he's hot. Right? You don't know what she could manipulate. She could feel it. But it was, it was, you know, because it was because he looks like a, a neurologist in a Marvel movie. But like, he looks like the way you would catch them. The Marvel movies.


It's like, he's going to tear his like scientist thing off of me. You got a thick ass. NEC is big Brawny, dude. He's a guy. You would see an, a Marvel movie who could play scientists your life. That's not a f*****g sign, getting a slop guys. Stop, go watch it. But there are times you feel like I get away with s**t that a guy would never, ever f*****g go like this, not fair. That's right. But it is fair. That's the dynamic. Cause there's no threat from you. That's why he can get away with it. Like, and you said something crazy to me. I'd be like, Whitney what the f**k you talking about? He would never be like, Oh Jesus. Now I have to be scared to be alone with her. A woman has to be scared to be alone with it. No, I think what happens to is that there's like the power comes into it too. And you're like, so is that like social power, political power career or power?


Or is it in the physical We know girls who have forced guys in to having sex with them. Girls who were in power, who force guys who are working for them To have a sense. We do. We do. We know that We know them. So this, but we don't give a f**k. How does it compare me to dive under this table at any moment? Any names? But it doesn't mean it's been to him and he's very upset with you with me. Right? Right. We don't care. But it was the other way around. It would be a real hard secret. No matter if they do care, I can be like, if they feel victimized by it, I do care for the victim. It's not a gender thing. They do feel like, f**k, I thought I wasn't gonna, but here's the thing, you know, You guys like, Jesus, I can't believe I'm doing this.


This is so disgusting. But I need this job. And he does it. We laugh. I would be like, yeah, Yeah. Cause of the story of what you did watch, I know you did it. And I think a lot of people get caught into the, in the sort of logistics of like, well, would you be able to get a bone or if you didn't wanna do it. Right. Joe what I mean. Oh, you know, we're doing anything, But you know, it lit it is a legitimate, good point. Yeah. It is a good point. Can you, as a man get raped without getting a bone. You know what I mean? If you can, if, if, if, if it's just mental to drink the com of whatever animal that was, then it's just mental to not be able to. Yeah. You can certainly make it.


You mean arguments that if a man gets an erection, that he's <inaudible>, but here's the thing. You can, a woman forced you into doing something and then you start enjoying it. So you go along with it. But the beginning part was forced. Right. So is it still OK, it's a good question. That would be like a overly aggressive man too. If a woman saying no, no, no, no. And then she starts liking it. Is that rape kind of, it is, especially if you're a, got a good editor, right. So hard. Because like four years ago, we know from comic's like what? The hot topics we're in it. It was f*****g 50 shades of grey where we literally, we are going when we say no, we mean, yes, that was literally like, if you have a helicopter on you're a billionaire or a Honda and the back of the Funyuns.


Now Another great bit of a bur has where he goes. No, always means no. He's like, no, it doesn't sometimes like, no stop, no stop is really hard. That's right. That's true. But on paper, it's not like, if you look at it, it in quotes, its like, okay. Yeah, no that's not cool. Yeah. Right. You know about the consent condoms. I was working on a bit about this before the, this concept condoms know I'm allergic to not having fun the way I didn't realize until I was 20, I thought it was fact that guy's can be allergic to latex. My balls dropped. It's not what I can be looking at. Why? Because guys would use that as an excuse to not use the ground dating pool.


But so, OK. Wait. So and so like condoms AR you have to have four hands on it to open the condom. Oh my gosh. By the way, if you are raping, there's probably not econom involved. And, but I know, but the joke I've trying to work on is like, you have to put all your hands on it, like a weed Gboard. Do you love me? And I just put it in to the trash cause nobody is using condoms. Come on, lets make condoms harder to find another barrier between Gundam don't think I've ever gotten involved in that. I'm always just like you handle that. I don't know where people got mad. There was outrage when the condoms came up because they weren't that's abelist because of people don't have Hans. They can't get their hands on me. And my point was, if you don't have hands aren't you just fist f*****g any way you like risk f*****g you're like stuff.


If we were playing a game of jeopardy with outrage, you know, to just looking for things, to be a p****d about. If you're really so p****d that need for hands to open up this condem because you only have one hand or someone out there only has one hand. That's a crazy thing to get upset about. Okay. Have a friend the Lindo hand. But it also, I think it's it's on them on us to stop, take an outrage. Seriously. We have to just ignore. It's not that big of a day. It's a game Or maybe it's a fine or a thing that you can be upset about finding it. You don't have to actually be upset Is in trouble and I, and I'm exaggerating wasn't that bad. But I said basket case basket case and yeah, it was a basket case because a basket case refers to soldiers in world war one that had all have their limbs removed. They could fit in a basket, they'd call them a basket case.


And it was like, I said something where I was like, if you insult yourself, it's a self deprecating thing. I'm saying I'm crazy. I'm a basket case in there. Like you're offending world war one, soldiers like no I'm offending my cell phone all day. I think they're fine. Got in trouble for it. When she was saying something that was veteran's day or something. And it was about she's some like, it was like Spaghettio's or something. She's like, yes, the only thing they can eat or something that they can eat without her teeth are something. And it was like people or like how dare you when it's like, but they are elderly and it's not, she's just making a joke. And then she didn't, she put out an apology that wasn't an apology and with a very good, we need to be really good at it. This is what happens when sports' goes away on a lot. This is what happens when it Everything's gone away.


Just, this is like the vibration of the country. Is it a different vibration if it was already happening, but this accentuated in a big way or the vibration So off all the unemployment rate, you know, James alternator, the guy who has one of the owner's just stand up New York. Did you read the article that he wrote about New York? He's like New York. City's dead forever. It's not coming back. Yeah. And it's f*****g terrifying. Yeah. And it's true. And it's, it's accurate. And I think that's the same with LA and I think it's the same with a lot of people and people are on f*****g tilt right now. You know what Austin, so cool dude to Austin stuff. But do you think that the sort of modern day Coliseum is Twitter? Like we've always had this in us. We've always wanted to watch people get torn up. No, no. I think its a totally new thing.


Not just watching people to get torn apart. It's the ability to participate. And it's also Like having stock and taking someone down, Getting addicted to this weird feedback loop that the book irresistible talks about. You're you're putting something out there and then your reading, the response to it, you're addicted to how many likes and retweets and show you guys. Right. And I think you feel addicted to feeling part of something without help take them. Right. And that was a part of that. I'm an activist activist. People have it in there, like bio is now and they're like activist or you as an activist right now Play in a lot of the complainant a lot. And they tried to get people canceled. Right. But just like you were at the noxious complaint, people were like, do you like it? The environment? I'm like, Oh f**k of coarse like the environment.


But I'd got to go to whole foods When actors don't get any attention to anymore, they become activists. And this is a really common thing with the people that are just pure narcissist. I just, you see them like supporting these f*****g causes Qualifications. Like what? Like what qualifies as well. I just feel like if you want to get the ultimate virtue signaling and the best way to be like a good person, because I do believe all of this is like a fear of death and people want to like live on terahash in our life. So there are there, like if I do all this good stuff or like when I die, like all the news will talk about me and they'll celebrate my birthday or whatever and I'll live on forever. But if you think about with, Oh my God, I'm having an add moment. What was I talking about? 80 D. 80 D. Oh, you were talking about cancel culture, cancel culture, activism, activism.


The best way to do it is the way that George Michael did it, where he S he was underground. Amazing. He was like giving to these charities. He's like a silent philanthropist. And if you really want that attention, which I'm not saying, that's what he did when he died, it came out that he was like, amazing. And it wasn't like the glory of being on this earth. Like everyone being like, wow, you're like, that's so amazing that you donate it as much as where people post their donations. It's so growth for the right reasons. I'm not rich enough to understand this people. Don't like, when you see a celebrity, Get a huge tax code or a donation, everyone's like, that was so amazing. Its like, well that's all so write off for them. So my God, they have to give a certain amount of care or a way to learn about it.


Yeah. It's just so transparent and gross when you see people trying so hard to get people to think they're virtuous and that's what it is. It's like it. But when you, when you see people to do it that you no are pure narcissist. It's a fence. What I felt like during the black lives matter, I was so conflicted. Cause I did want to, I was like, I don't want people to, I am like For I want people to have equality. And, and I do believe their systematic racism and her stomach. I sit around uneducation and mom and dad had to get any more of it. You did a f*****g send me to a s****y schools, but no, but I do believe in that, but like with the black square, I ended up posting it. And then I, the reason I was so mad at myself as, because I always I'll do the thing, but I always want there to be an, an, an element of jokes cuz I'm a comedian yet.


So I realized after I posted it, what I should've done was repost Rachel <inaudible> black square. And then it would have had like in the corner of what I have said, and I f*****g miss that opportunity. But people were like, you're a virtuous. And it's like, I just, I don't, I do want to let it be known that I'm willing to like lose followers over. But you have to also know what like their motive in doing it. It's so clear when someone's doing it. It's self serving. It's like when someone dies and you see them post a picture of them and the person that died, it's like, did you just go into your iCloud and be like, where's that photo of me and the dead Joan Rivers died. Someone posted it. A comic posters is terrible. Posted a thing that was like, I'm I'm going to Ms. Joan Rivers. When she saw me perform and told me how amazing it was.


Just like, how are you managing to make this death about you? When you know Nothing gross her than when someone talks about how much someone who died, loved them, loved them, thought they were awesome. No to Dom was burning and everyone was posting photos of them at Notre Dame. Bragging about they're just bragging by your chin. None of them went in. None of them waited in line to go in. They were outside like f**k that line. And then as soon as they caught on fire, then it was like, this is me. Well, during the protests, they were getting people or to canceling like the people taking selfies with the, they were taking selfies then going home, but not actually protesting because it wasn't one of the protests and people come and take a picture and just start out. And I was like, Jesus Christ. I told Don Ella, it was like, if you need my, my white body to jump in front of you because they were showing videos of like white girls going in front of black, guy's when the cops would come over to stand in front of them as a white shield.


I was like, I was like, Donna, I'll stand in front. I'll use my wipe out in front me. But only when the cameras on, like I just liked jumping front and I get my photo up and I'm like, all right, so ridiculous. But yeah, I think it's just like a matter of motives than it is so clear when someone is using their own agenda. All right. I think we're all addicted to attention to it. I love attention to social media is the big attention fix. And everybody is hooked on. Imagine thinking that someone imagined being on a soap opera and thinking someone wants your take on P*****k. Like imagine being an actress, It's a career move. I really do. I think when you to support the right candidate or you want to support the right bill or are you No, I've had zero celebrities.


Scott <inaudible> so yeah. Zero will look at it. He had zero, zero, zero celebrities, you know, Kanye eventually. But I know a guy, is he coming on? Don't think so. The irony that celebrities think there helping when in reality they're harming the fact that they didn't go like, Oh, this is why people hated Hillary a big part of it. How that's why Ricky gervais' is so funny. Like calling everyone out at the award ceremonies because they were on there. Like they are all like, f**k, how are we want some times up? I'm like your friends from last year. How many of them have them have videos of them thanking him with the Academy awards? That's what we were all raised. There's so many people thanking Harvey Weinstein. How p****d off it. What was so mad? He like you f*****g a*****e.


No, but he probably was like, I never saw this comment could have ever thought that I could. I get taken down with all those videos. Have all of those people, Meryl Streep, Sanho. Amazing. I am all of these people. So now how amazing he is, No matter how crazy that was. I remember being at the comedy store when <inaudible> was doing that. And I posted Oh everyone's mad at Ricky gervais', which probably means he told them jokes. Like I tweeted that or something. Ben Shapiro was tweeting it like Candice Owens was I'll all of a sudden I was all right. Cause that was defending jokes. You knows about this. Why is, why are you all right? If you're a pro Comedy Because they're not being real. That's why they're not being honest. They're just this. Want to box you into a corner and label you and then play this game to see how many people retweeted, where it goes and whether they can get you canceled their no one wants a new one.


What's that? No one that I'm generalizing, same thing, but a lot of it, what it is, its like they just look at you as a target. I read on somewhere that 22% of people are on Twitter and of that 2% generate 80% of the comments. So that's also such a small group In their own immensely. There's a lot of them are mentally ill. Like legitimately, mentally ill, like depressed, anxious, f****d up, checking the s**t constantly to do that. If you're a rental on they're on their bios, it will say proud mental, mental health. I always get someone that is like your, a busted hor. And I always want to like go to their page. And so I was like proud father. I'm like, I want a girl who was so obviously a woman Wright's that hurt.


She identifies as her s**t. And they were like, well what of course, if it's a different thing, show me that. Right? If a favorite is They them, you write the them on your bio. I love it. Are they? It's a, I mean I think that we have to stop taking cancel because like we have to start giving it air Tom, you know, we have to stop it. We can tell by the Marina can be free. You talking. It is what's important to me. We are talking about them like this, but I just like, whenever it's like, we can't do jokes. I guess you can f*****g do them. Keep doing it in a Franklin has a job that I know I'm going to butcher it, but it's something along. Do you know? Her body love her? And it was just so funny. Okay. So she goes, she goes, I can't use people's correct pronouns because they just sound like a slave. If I'm like, Hey, you know what I mean?


Like slave wife. But when you get into a car and telling jokes, people Want to laugh. Other comics might not want to, journalists might not want to justice worried. It might not want it to. But the average person is like not on Twitter every day at that time. Yeah. Well people trying to be offended was when we were talking about earlier, that's not that they are actually offended. They are trying to be offended. And then it becomes a game. Find things that or targets does it, does it actually offending U? Is that what you're talking about? Or have you found a valid target and now you're just going after it because this is the game people are like, yeah, you sank my battleship. They were playing a little weird game. What makes them feel important or something? And then the most annoying f*****g thing I got is whenever I like laugh at it and offensive joke at some of those you're enabling like, Oh, so I'm the problem You got to realize.


It's like even an invalid criticism. Is it still valid? Like me to that dummy, that's like a valid piece of criticism. And like we can't silence them either. <inaudible> with the whole thing is mocking them. Right? Like mock it. So it it's like you expose it for what you really think it is, but they have to be able to do that to it. So we could figure out where the line really is. Yeah. This is what a lot of people that are really super liberal don't understand why they think it's a good idea to silence and deep platform, conservative people. It's a terrible idea because then you don't develop the proper arguments for what they're to be like. Yeah. Like the way that these things are supposed to go is someone says something like you're an enabler and you like shut the f**k up. And everybody's like for you.


And if that person looks like a moron and then someone has a valid piece of crisis, then the comic kind of looks like a Dick. And then maybe the, that, and then it was When you figure out what we actually right now Agree on it. Instead of using buzz words and using like a little things that people say to just find a target, We both have to exist for us both to exist. We will figure it out. And a lot of those people are going to get out of that. They're going to be your friend one time. And also your you're a loud, like, like your not better than other people, because you think a certain way. There's so many people that are like, I'm, Right obviously, and you're wrong obviously. And it's like, that's not how things work. And with all the canceling, all the Twitter stuff, they are going past like down this line of which now we've given them when sweater, right? Your just giving people a transcript have like all the s**t you've set over the years.


But it's like, you're expected to have this perfect record. Like you're never supposed to. We're flawed humans. That's how I learned. That's how we learn. That's how we grow. It's through adversity. We learn, we f**k up. We fail. We get back up and there's no room for that anymore. Oh, here's the thing like why are you spending so much time complaining about other people all day? I will tell you why, because you're not healthy. It's like, you're doing smart things. If you look at your Twitter timeline and I'm seeing tweets 12 hours a day, Your crazy different. Yeah. They might not realize your a crazy person. There will be a day where we will look back and go member when anyone could get on Twitter. And any time you think there is going to be like a like smoking, there's going to be like restrictions. Okay. Twitter is going to be like blockbuster video, I think were going to look back.


Remember when we used to communicate through Twitter, I call my God. It was so toxic. Everybody was telling me were going to hit some new thing. Next it's going to allow people to read each other's minds or Elon Musk. Neurolink which he's talking about. Communicating. No words were going to hit that. And it's going to make, this seemed like nonsense because we were lacking it. This is one of the things that are in that book. Irresistible there's there's no empathy right? In these conversations. That's the big part of the problem. It's like, you don't see the people, you don't feel their pain. So you can say horrible s**t to them. It's the vast majority of the way people are communicating. Like a lot of people that's the vast majority of their communication is text messages and tweets. And none of it is person to person. Like all these kids are arguing with each other through tacks because they don't want to look at each other and talk like human beings.


That's the only way you develop and grow as a person. Right. Louis did like a whole kind of bit on one of the late show's before, obviously at the canceling, but ki where he was talking about that. He's like, you need, like, you need to see someone's feelings. Be hurt to realize that your words have a specific type of impact on people. Yeah. And then you decide like, Oh, I don't wanna do that anymore. Don't want to go. But if you don't, you just are, are shooting those things out and there going into this void, you get, you get praised from them by all the t***s are sitting at home by themselves. They cancel. They're so excited about it, Bob, like a little moms, little mom. So it's a drum. It is a drug. Or you do feel high end. I get to say is like the same way.


When you drive by a car accident, you're like, well, I hope to see everybody kind of like, want us to do some f*****g that s**t. When I see that someone, you know, you, that they do these, like so-and-so is over a party, which is so f****d up when you think about it. But I'm always looking like part pure adrenaline. And I can't help myself. My God, I'm a bunch of female comedians who are like that. Some that would probably say the comedy store sucks. They did a M a retirement party for men. But it was like all of these like comics that aren't past the actual clubs, female comics. Yeah. And they had like a banner and it was like by men or whatever was like two years ago. I'm like, Oh God, that sounds like a good time. Maybe a f*****g joke.


I will let you in all. We want to see you to be like Andy and I, where you know, bonding a lot over the break about sort of like, you know, no one's been mean her interest in this business than women. Yeah. It was just like a, like, no one has to add that uncomfortable conversation right now it's on men versus women. It's a bad versus good Matt and good men versus bad women. Again, that's like, we live in generalizations. We love generalizations. And we don't like nuance because it makes us force. It forces us to look at her own ideas. That's uncomfortable now. And it just because you know, men are doing well in, in, in a business and your not, it doesn't mean the men have some sort of a conspiracy.


You know, I think it's harder for a woman to be a comic. I do. And I think it's harder because as a society, I think it's more difficult to talk about things that are important. Like a man could talk about. Politics is very difficult for a woman to go on stage, talk about politics. Men can talk about sex and they don't look like their, a s**t are damaged. No, I think if you're on a channel, you can, if you were an unattractive woman, A woman, like there was a guy who Christopher Hitchens, Christopher Hitchens had a, a bit in a vanity fair, wrote up story and women aren't funny. And that was, it was like, wow, this really sort of take down of like the kind of comedy that a woman has to do, to be funny, they have to be bushy or it has to be a male kind of car. And I don't necessarily agree with them. Cause I think there's a lot of women that are really funny, but I think its a harder path.


I think it's a more narrow keyhole your shooting through. Whereas a guy I think in general audiences will accept a man telling them what's wrong. Whereas I think a lot of men in particular on dates do not want to hear a woman, especially in the attractive one. Tel the, the, the guy in the audience that he's wrong. Yeah. Well I think women are naturally more empathetic can tend to be more empathetic just because we're mothers, we're nurturers or caregivers. And so we know more or not, but we are barren. And if you have to do a comedy whenever like, like Jody said some things like you have a smart, you're like, yeah, you know, you were like one of the guy's like you fit them with it. I'm like you fit in with me b***h. Like this is what I am, but I'm but, but it's like, Oh f**k, I keep forgetting.


I'm going to stop smoking weed. It's like early on bed. And I know that comedian a female's are more empathetic sympathetic to the world who are willing to listen to guy talk about his de jerking off her or anything. Like one of those things that maybe we wouldn't have the experience of having as a woman, but guys are less interested in hearing about ourselves. One of the points that Hitchins was making that we're wired to worry about women. If they hurt themselves in so much of a comedy, just talking about, I hurt myself, I've made this mistake. I just thought, you know, that it's sort of like we're wired to be protective of them. So it's not funny. Like if a, if a man slips on a banana peel, its funny. If a woman's slips on a banana peel is like, are you, You don't think there's any one factor? I think there's a bunch of factors, but I think that's it To I think that that factors in too, but I think the big one has meant don't want to hear women talking about things like opinions on politics or opinions on money or opinions on like they get mad.


You know, a lot of guys are like, they'll get that things. Especially young guys, the young guys on dates that want to look like a cool guy in some girls saying something like here's the f*****g problem with man, this b***h. Yeah. You know, if you don't vote for, by, you know, you aint black or white or whatever, whatever they wanted to say. I remember Charlemagne was like trying to help. Wow. Yeah. Charlemagne was like, damn I love Charlotte event. But it had to be in his head. He had to be like, damn, that's a good clip right there. No, it was like 10 million. You got it bad for America. Do you remember? Lets see, do you remember a time when we were doing stand up and people would intro us as, so are you guys ready for a lady?


Have they been introduce that your going to be released? If this is not to be a very ladylike? Sorry. It was just their way of saying, if you guys need to go to the bathroom or feel your meter now it's at a time That was a, what we talked about or the other night at the word comedian, then it used to be a word. I get that a lot. People will say that it like, it is ironic. It's like the New York times and like really fancy journalist's will say comedian. And I'm like, are you supposed to be the most aggressive? That's supposed to be sophisticated. Right? A lot of people don't even like actress anymore. They just say I'm an actor. Yeah. Because a female can be an adjective. Does that Like that? They prefer activist. I actually don't mind being like treated like an under cause it's an opportunity. Make a joke. Yeah. Like when they bring your own way of saying before, like sometimes going around in was D Jason Golan is a car like a burn me on and be like, this is sexy.


This next sexy. And I'm always like, Ooh, but instead of getting offended, I just go on stage. And I always go, when we were out in the parking lot, one night, he said, if my wife are dead, I'd f**k you. F**k that s**t out of him. And he's like, if I was dead, possibly he could f**k the s**t out of bed. And it always gets a laugh. It makes the less uncomfortable it's like our job is to like make fun of a weird situation. Like not go like I'm deeply. Like why would I be offended? Who cares? I know. And it's fun to come on in a hole sometimes and dig out as much. It's definitely some way to break the ice. Yeah. And there's also like, you know, I remember when I first started, never was like, you know, I look back and I'm like people with a women aren't funny. And a woman or if I was like, I wasn't funny when I started, no, one's funny when the f**k, you know, as an artist.


And so I was molesting me in laughing and my jokes on it. But I remember being so fender when people like women, aren't funny and I couldn't get stage time because I didn't deserve such time. And there's a lot of guys are not funny. To No, it's not isolated to any gender. There's a lot of women that are funny and that, so that's why the whole thing is so offensive because its to the people that have already gotten through and become professional comics and they know what the real deal is, the real deal is. You're like everybody, who's funny. That's the real deal. The real deal is everybody is kind of really cool to each other that are really funny. When you make fun of each other. It's Michelle for whoever is a killer, a fortune Fenster whoever, if anything, My family they're only curly haired women. Sorry <inaudible> You mean all of those people are just accepted because of them.


Yeah. Nobody pays money. Drives out to a comedy show that gets a date Pais, a two drink minimum and then wants to like intentionally not laugh at someone. Yeah. Nobody does that. They know they want you to win. Right. But I think a lot of guys have a hard time with women being in control. I really do. I know a lot of guys that's where I'm like, she's hilarious. Oh we don't want to f*****g, it talks about this too much or anything. Yeah. There's just, there's no off limits. That was just funny. It's funny. He can talk about anything. There is no, Do you remember? It needs to be male political. Comedian's like will Durst, like his whole act would be political or Randy Credico right. The whole act was political. Jimmy tingles is very political. There's never a woman Right now. There's like talk show it's like Samantha B or like, Oh, you know, shows like talk the talk shows Samantha be like in the audience when Samantha bee had a, I remembered it, there were a first running the ad campaign for the show coming out.


They still, that were doing things that were, it was like they had to have like these big balls. There's like they were like playing so much on the gender thing where it's almost like, just do the show and dome, which by the way you do whatever you want. And obviously she does is a successful show, but its like, let's just be a women doing thing and not to talk about the fact we're not doing anything Yet. Well you, when you're a woman and you're in a position of power like that, you kind of have to like, don't be the one who takes control. And like if there's an issue that needs to be discussed, you kind of have to call it out on your show that it's not like a, if a guy is doing a show like Jimi tingle or not to be tangled Jimmy. Right. You can stop saying tingles too is just silly names for it.


Those guys from Boston, when it first started, which was a brilliant, brilliant comedian, but any way on a male comic doesn't feel like they have to defend men. Right? Like if I have another male comic who is getting s**t on, they don't feel like they have to jump into the fray. Hey are you guys have to stick together? But women do well. You don't think I don't. I feel like, but I think it's fun. I don't have the parts. I don't have t**s and I don't have any less. You had to say barren with Barron Trump around it to Trump's kids. Like for real interest in like imagine if it becomes a word that like, Hey, you know what? The No longer seeing that at least of his brother, You just say in fertil you have other words to use the right ones. As long ones that know about our proposition for a while I was telling her, are you two or the ones that have made me forget the most about whether I'm going to have kids or not?


Do you want to go have a disease unfreezing? Her ex well you both are like, you both. We're like, if you are going to have kids, you put it out from us. And she was like freezer eggs. Today was like, can I borrow money for the Uber? Or at least like Uber in LA as of today. Oh really? Uber and Lyft down. Cool. Yeah, because of covert. There's nothing to do in there. Right? Because the regulations th the state government wants to put on people. They want them all to be employees, but are using the covert as the, no, they're not using COVID-19. It's just, they're just past it. And Uber and lift are both pulling out in California, which is going to mean how many people we are going to have to drive drunk. Now how many people are not going to have jobs? Exactly. How many people who are barely getting by in any way, all of a sudden got out the carpet got pulled out from under him.


And there's a lot of people that are, at least they are doing Uber and that driving people around their, again, How many comments are going to lose all of their setup. Now the Uber drivers to talk that way, You know, you can hope that they come to their senses and realize how crazy this is and this time to take any job away, what the problem is. Some people want it because they want health insurance. And they want all sorts of protections as an employee. Right. But it's a, it's a gig, you know, it's what they call it like a gig employment. Right, right, right. It's not a job. It's on a career. Its just to get it and you can make a lot of money doing it part time and they are, they're like, nah, f**k you. You're making a lot of money. They're not making as much money. You need to give them some of that money. They need to be employees. I get the argument.


Why is this is an Airbnb are not allowed to, because of coven right now. No, no. I don't think that's true because I know people who have used Airbnb. It's good. What was going to say like everyone's like sideburns or no Things and shift. But, but, but a lot, I bet there hurting though. Not a lot of people don't want to do it. But the thing about the Uber in the Lyft thing, its like I see both ways because it was like, well how much money do they make off of that app and how they divvy that s**t up. I see a lot of those drivers and Tesla is, and I'm like, you must be making some money right now. Maybe that's just the person who wants a Tesla. It says, if I just work 10 hours a day can afford a tax. But the thing is like whose w the Uber people on the list at the people at the own, the company, how much are they making? But just having an app. Yeah. And I think they're not good.


I don't think that they give a great percentage to that. I started not liking Uber. When the drivers could rate you back, I hit you back. And I would just get into Uber's sometimes and say nothing. I'm going in the car and start working on my ad. And sometimes people do want to chat and I'm just really quiet. And then I would get like for stars maybe, then like maybe they didn't like, or your special ed or like, we need to trust me if my talk is going to be much worse. No, it does Lyft do the same thing they have that. No, I know I would only a dozen Uber, but just lift habit. The, I don't know, I got cancer. I got kicked off of Lyft because it was, the driver was rammed my foot over once and I left a message on his answering machine. I hope you rot in f*****g hell.


And, and then they said they abused him. And then they asked why, and I just went, honestly, I'm PMs sing. And it wasn't that wasn't a good one. I was like, honestly, you almost hurt me on my period Over your f*****g phone. So We try. And where are they trying to change what PMs is called? Because it was offensive. It was that instead of it's me and she at night, it wasn't a post A menstrual dysmorphia or aren't they calling it? That now did we change the world? Body dysmorphia? Yeah. They were trying to put tampons in the men's bathroom at Yale because they said sometimes men, men straight. I think the last time I was on this podcast, and then we talked about it's adorable. Do some weird. It was just sometimes women don't, you know thing is though.


It's like, it's not like being anti-Trump it's a show. They're not allowed to talk about it at all. Unless you're like completely on the side of, of, I don't want to say it don't want to talk about it. It's like your getting canceled. You can't just go like I'm standing outside of this situation. I, this side is saying this and the side is saying that and you can cause then they were like, you're training. Here's what we mean. If you can say here's what you can say. We put tampons in the men's room because sometimes trans women use the men's room and they can still get there. Period. That's an accurate way of saying that that's a real way. You can, you can say that holla. Isn't it. There you go. It's not me. It's not me here.


I'm a mess. But it wasn't me. That's you that's right. When someone s***s on you for <inaudible> the only thing that No, he asked her it's a little after being like, Oh, you guys were there without me. I know this is Tim Dillon being like, f**k you, You know, very distinctive ring. So again, if you call me, I know exactly what it is on silent. I have T-Rex roar that. Yeah. So when someone calls me at Rogan Dude, when did we ever got to see you again? Joe I'm actually starting get sad because it was just disgusting. Visit. I'll come back. I only fly private now. So it's Podcast my second Rogan I thought right.


But my favorite part of Austin is it has the largest population of bats in North America is good. Great. But that gave us grow. Any of them are not Chinese people. Jesus did that scientist under a bridge in every night We had scientists, science, cancels. Have you seen them fly out from one of them? It's wild. Yeah. At dusk. So cool. Yeah. It's really cool. As soon as it starts turn dark out there for a while. I mean millions of them. No, I have to stay in North America. Look at that. Look at that largest number of bags festival. That's so funny. That's in Austin. What's it called? A Moontower Moontower is an Austin. The only city that still operates moon towers. Right? I don't know it is. I don't know. I believe it is.


I never want to a I've never done any of those. Yeah, those are good. And the Austin city limits is another one. It also has the only nude beach in Texas. I do know that I've done Austin city limits. I've done the theatre, the big theater there, but what does the, the theater then the paramount does that? What it is, is that the ones that you can, I don't know, but it's beautiful. It's gorgeous inside the side at the paramount theater in Austin. It's a f*****g No, no, no. The Moonlight towers is awesome. No one surviving Moonlight tower's in the world. What does that mean? There you go on at night and it creates Lite as if it was the moon. They are everywhere. They're only known and surviving. And then there's a picture of Brody. I hate that in a gun. It's like, f**k you.


I got my Brodie pen. By the way. Robin's got what I have you been the awesome before. Yeah, we did the Moontower. Nice. Nice. Do they? Let me do festivals sometimes were going to come. We are going to come let Joe Hunter come visit. We are going to take over you're studio for our Podcast trauma, trauma bonding. I know you already have one with Bonnie and I am jealous. Well, it's going to be honest. And we're just doing six where it's a limited series. You know, If the bond is going to try to put a wedge between the two. No, I think she does. He's the coolest. I talked to Bonnie every day we laugh. All she's the f*****g right. It's funny ass b***h. She's in the world. And did you ever see a movie? You know what we're talking about, women. Aren't funny. It's a f*****g, when she documented like a guy and when I say she looks like Rafi, who are we talking about the other day?


A little bit. Yeah. You look at something that made me laugh so hard at that documentary is when a, there was, she was like, well, they're are some women that aren't funny. And because there's less of us, you can make a sort of stereotype based on one person. And she's like, we don't need to get more women in Comedy. We just have to ask the people that suck to quit. And she started calling, she called up a bunch of female comics when she was like, Hey, can you stop doing stand up? It's ruining. And for the rest time and all that stuff, Do you know what my feelings, our it's not the people that suck. It's the people that aren't that good. Those are the dangerous ones. It's not the ones that sucks because the ones that sucked, everybody knows they suck. They're just kind of, it never happened. The ones that are just f*****g shame it's their, their premises or kind of OK. The delivery's kind of areye they get so hung up, but they don't get enough.


And then they're angry. Those are the ones outside of the walled garden next fall. That because if you think about the best pickup line for a male comic to hit on a female comic is you're funny. You're a really funny, you're funny. And that girl is like, I am like totally worked on me so mad. But to me, I feel like if someone says your funny or not funny, if you come off stage, like in seconds, there are nine. That means your funny. If someone thinks you're funny, they, if they say it, it should register right now, the problem is that's you get that male, female dynamic. It's like, it's trying to f**k me. What does that make sense? Right. Well, that's why like that you find me disgusting and you're you're so that's what I'm like.


OK. I have to say that in the moment they're there was so fun and it was very amazing about Comedy that does kind of new to us. You know, we don't feel sexual energy around. Comic's like no offense, but there are just something that just feels very fraternal. And it just, I never feel What we were talking about at the Comedy story the other night, when we're doing the thing, it's like, there's not that many of us, there might be a thousand of us on the planet at a 700 million. You may be way less for this pandemic legitimate. Well, they can't drive lifted anymore. They got to go home. You know, I feel like I'm going to come back and a half the comic's are going to have to have moved home and I'm going to get sick. Another sweet spot at the comedy store, or now I'm like, Oh, You will. Then the question is how many clubs is going to be open in the car and started going to stay open?


How many clubs we'll be? There's going to be a lot to go under a lot. Maybe half of 'em in the country. A lot of what I was hearing was I kept booking dates and cancelling and booking and cancelling member during that time. And it was just chaos, right? We didn't want to just surrender to what the f**k was happening. But a lot of clubs wanted us to book knowing we were going to have to cancel just so they can get some income. Then they work on a refund. They we're just gonna give you a credit. So it was, I paid money to C Joe. Rogan knowing he, the lights on end to go, just to keep the lights on knowing the show was never going to happen. And then you get a credit to my class. One giant leap had one had become a president baled out of all of the clubs have become a president.


<inaudible> he's like how many of them are doing become a president? It was just so weird because a lot of these clubs are barely functioning without a plan that now Yeah, like laugh factory. And like maybe some of the smaller outside club's like haha or ice house. They can do an extra goes in Boston at all those years back. Well, they opened up the Wilbur theater. And so when, when bill boom and Right started doing shows of the Wilbur, the, the Wilbur's like 1200, 1300 people. So we started getting literally like a good headliner who would sell out Faneuil hall, which is like 500 people or a 400 people.


You could actually with his mail list. And the fact that Kami is so popular in Boston, he could sell out the Wilbur. I just remember like the comedy store or is my favorite room and the world that's the best one yet. The Comedy connection. That room FanDuel hall ones, the way in that it was, it was a shallow and kind of wide with low ceilings. I used to get Ari Shaffir is so high that he couldn't remember when he talked about, and then I'd send him on stage. And he was like, Mmm, to me. No, no, no, no. It was fine. I go, I go, he goes or shouldn't get too hot. I go, dude, you can't get fired. You literally can't get fired A fun, man. Let's keep, just go out. And then it goes, you can drag your friends.


I have not a part of that. He came to my house like a year ago and was like, I need to talk to you. And I was like, Oh s**t, there's probably not going to go away. But this is a prank waiting to happen to get dosed or something. And he came over and he took me on a hike and he was like, basically like, this is an intervention. You need to go get lost somewhere. Like, I want you to go to Peru for two months without a cell phone or something. And I was like, you're out of your f*****g mind. He goes, but keep tweeting, controversial things. <inaudible> no, but, and then the f****n pandemic happened. It was like, I should have f*****g done that.


Yeah. But they knew he stuck in Thailand or something like that. Waiting to come home. A lot of people get stuck in other countries, right? The last in your f*****g field of it, We sent it because he did it himself and he a great benefit and doing it. And he's right. A lot of them, Because he was off Twitter for a couple of months, There is, there's a real benefit for that. And we want to do it. You know, there's a, one of the things that are on the one of the first comments so that when I posted that book, he was like, ah, I'll accept your apology. Why are you going to change your cell phone habits now that you read that book? Well, you know that I put on my phone because of you. I have a folder called addict at the very end with my social media, but now I just scroll seven times to get to it.


And then do you know what I do when I'm healthy? I delete all of the, the app. So then you have to re download them. And it's just this extra step. That's annoying. However, the normalized to do the extra step, then do you know what I realized? I just kept, I would pick my phone up and I would just tap. Like, I'm so addicted to just, No, it would start downloading. You know, when someone is telling me this was a real doctor, Huber men said that people, when they come out of surgery, the first thing they do when they come out of anesthesia, as they grab their genitals, it's just like a subconscious thing. Yes. But now they read from their phones. Oh my God, it's better than you, Dick. Wow. It's going to, it's going to be a part of your body. It's just a matter of time. We're so attached to those g*******d things.


If Elon Musks really follows through with his neurologic things and they cut a whole in people's head of the size of the quarter and stick a bunch of wires into your brain, which is literally what he said they were going to do. And you have some Bluetooth enabled, like people read about vaccines. Like, but here's the thing that, you know what he was saying, his it's going to be a massive advantage for people that have it. You are going to have much more access to information. The bandwidth in which you process information, we'll be much thicker and wider. No. And it will be able to remember thoughts. Oh my God. So person one day, You know what it is? It's like, we're root. Cause there's three of us. We're all have s**t to say, like, Everybody always thinks people were on Adderall or a Coke on your show because it's like so exciting to talk. Cause you have three hours slow down. No, I know, but it gets you the energy, like you were having a fun conversation.


It's like, I got something and say, you like it, or you don't know where to jump in. When you know, Let me do my joy Diaz, impression. It's hay. Joe Rogan I like you. And he calls her Joe Rogan. So today someone said, we couldn't school's can open up the club's can open up. The venues can open up. We can go back to normal. If you wear this bracelet that tells me where you are at all times where you were last night and who you hung out. What if this is the problem with it? The same problem with shutting down a tick tock house, just because you shut down and house that has a 200 people, or what if it gets down to five wood, if they tell you, you have to split your family up, what of you have 10 people on your house? You cannot have more than 10 or whatever you have to have.


Grandma comes over, can come over the f**k. Are they have to tell you cannot have a party. You of mismanaged is crisis. So horribly every step of the way and not just the city and not just the state, the federal government. And of course the people that we're releasing the information from woo hon, that's the big step. Cause they're the ones that f****d it up. Cause there's a lot of legit doctors and scientists that were in Wu Han Chinese doctors that were trying to get the word out and they were silenced. And the main one, the first one that did it actually wound up dying from the f*****g, but it's crazy. Right? So that's, that's the biggest fuck-up but there is fuckups every step of the way. And one of the biggest fuck-ups is happening right now. It's these people being in the position of power in telling people that they can't work, tell them people that can't do things that you can protest.


I'm going to say you can't. But I did. You did see that Tim Dillan is supposed to do this. The governor's in long Island, the Comedy club, but you can't have a person that just because they win a popularity contest, make new rules. You can't give them the power to make new rules. Cause everybody comes a f*****g Tyron and they know what they're doing is that all they're doing is to protect people. If you tell me how many f*****g the hospital beds you have, you tell me what the death rate is. And then you tell me why this is the only state and the country that can do that. Can't open a beauty salon. The beauty salons can't be open right now. Only California, their crazy. This is the it's a crazy state. And they opened them for a second and then took it away with your tooth. It's cause we don't pay taxes. Exactly what it is in the Uber s**t.


I've never seen tipping point. This is that people are going to wake the f**k up. No, it's fine. Just don't tell anybody we don't say now. I'm Podcasts nobody knows. Lets just say let's just say on paper man, Wesley Snipes have a lot in common. No dude, they don't f**k around. They fight it. No, no, no. I'm having my, but I'm not talking about this. Actually <inaudible> fine. But the This the state is just, they are terrible at it. And did the fact that they can shut down these tick talkers? We should be nervous. Not because these tick Dockers are geniuses is, but it's because who the f**k are you to say? You you can shut the power off. Wow. You can shut someone's power or whatever. Yeah. They're taking there. The plane got to use their phones.


If your phone's going to die. And then you're a f**k up. They're shutting the light's off in the house. It's what they're doing, their cutting off the water. But if you do that, like your saying that you have the ability to shut off essentially things that keep people alive, water and power. And here's your saying that you have the ability to tell them how they can live in this house. And there's no real law that says you can limit the amount of people that can go to a party. Don't think they're good. I'll tell you where this does not happen, Texas. No bye. Mom is from Texas. Yeah. You do not want to tell people from Texas what to f*****g do except don't smoke weed. Yeah, because we'd what are we can do about that? No, I'm going to have the occupancy laws and s**t like that.


Like the amount of people that can be place. But if you can change them, can you, can you make it a house like of a house? Is it normally has party like Dan Bilzerian is placed. You're in college and you have two, many people at your house. They'll come and shut it down. Right. But that's the cops and that's not your house. That's it. That's going on in the house. Either their probably renting it. Now I have $10 million to buy those houses. Or if the people who own the house have some sort of a regulation may be, I could see it. But if you like Dan Bilzerian didn't own that house either. And the whole thing about that house, it would p**s off the neighbors was because he would just buss in people and they'd fill that place up and DJs and marshmallows, their and s**t. And he's going crazy, but they didn't shut his power up. So there's that they're saying, then they have the ability to show your power or water off because during the pandemic they can limit the amount of people in your house.


That's a new rule because they were having these occupancy laws. Dan Bilzerian would have gotten shut down to their doing it because they are saying you could spread COVID this way. And it's irresponsible. The problem is the way that they're doing something new. Yeah. Just shutting power off on someone's house that doesn't listen is shutting power off on someone. Who's having a party who doesn't know Bay, But didn't know they have, they're doing it for press to kind of let people know what's up like a, a threat It's and this is the same f*****g guy that offered rewards for people who turn folks in. Remember that the whole thing snitches get stitches. Well now snitches get rewards. If people and social justice is saying that people are happy at parties. And that was for small parties.


Remember that was where people were having f*****g barbecues. This s**t is slippery. Do you think I'm going to get to that because I'm starting as stand up show in my backyard, just for comics were going to do testing, like what Chappelle is doing in Ohio. I'm going to do with my backyard because it was just getting crazy. Am I gonna shut down? I don't know. But are you going to let everybody know where you live? No, I'm all it's going to be. It's basically going to be like a, bring her show is going to be like comic, bring life to friends that you trust to know you guys, if you join my Patrion or a raffle or some s**t, we might try to show you some stuff. I'm like, why not? Why not? No, no. I just wonder what does the law like, see if we can find out if there's any written thing, any people can I have? No. Yeah. Like what, what is the law? And now in LA, if these tick talkers have too many people, right?


Well we've a lot. I'm going to have like five comics and what I think you should just be arrested if that's a law, I think you should be fine or something. I don't think you should be able to shut. Someone's f*****g power behind me. All right. By. Yeah. If like, if these tic talkers like, Hey, you guys are violating the law. So here's a fine of $200. This blunt things that make sense. If you're finding someone for. So like if, if you park on the wrong place, you could get fined. But this is a thing that they are doing. That's weird. There are shutting power off. What it's on loud or an unruly gatherings is known as the party Haus ordinance hate Dan Bilzerian that I've ever worked on. You officially took place August 15, 2018. They never use it on him. The ordinance claims to curb repeat offenders of attic control party's of residential neighborhoods with escalating fines and new enforcement from Los Angeles police department.


I don't think that is connected though, because this is 2018. Is that like a blanket statement? Don't think that's connected to the ticktock house. These are all 2006. You are so to heatwave, it was 107. You cannot cut up someone's electricity and 179. Exactly, exactly. It's and we're all assuming their kids and their allowed to be there. The property owners who skirt building and safety rules or city laws such as a Los Angeles party house ordinance was the same law Right are in violation of COVID-19 public health. Order's in the cities party house ordinance, which becomes the law in 2018. So there talking about that law and it said it wasn't clear whether Garcetti's announcement was related to that motion. Okay. What It feels like it's just a little ad hoc, right?


Right. Exactly. They're making up as they go along it still sneaky. I love you. The proposal penalties for a large gatherings could include water in power, shut off a permit prohibitions and having a certificate of Hopkins occupancy held or revert revoked for large close contact, largely masked. This gathering's in violation of city, emergency orders and County health order. So the city emergency and the County health order, they make an order saying you can have a large gathering. And if you do there going to do a new thing, which is shut your water in power off. When do they f*****g never do that? If you're a fugitive, you have to have like a gun and you're pointing it out the window. I want to show your power in the water off. We always that risk at fires. And now you are making, We use a candle light it like that's not safe.


I've seen, I've seen these kids. They don't shower anyway. So don't punish them as much slippery thing. That is a God complex, Stupid that these kids want to have these parties. And we were talking about dr. Malkin and all of these people that came to him that got sick from one of those parties, or you can get sick for sure. And D, there's probably, you know, it's a high likelihood that people are going to die. If they keep getting sick and they infect someone, you know, out of, you know, it's like 0.04% of people who catch COVID die. That's what the current standings are. So it could lead to a death or to it. It is possible. But it just, I just don't think you should allow people to do this. Do you see how the Steve Bannon was busted by the male? Did you know the, the male could make arrests?


The daily mail, the mail, the mail. And it was the postal service. They have like a rest of the world that's who are arrested. No, this is girls. We are talking about politics and have to be so bad. Oh, can we, can you guys keep going? I'll pee going to keep going. Weird. Look At this, post it on. I want to sell all of this stop. This arrested Steve Bannon. Is that cool? Let's read it. Look at his face. Look at the guy. He looks like Javier. No, I'm going to be Josef. Rogan the us postal service is out to deliver justice against former white house, chief strategist, Steve Bannon. It may not come as a shock that Bannon and often described as a grifter was allegedly caught up in a scheme to defraud Griffin, a loon.


Yeah. They have a f*****g police. Isn't that crazy? I hate when they take tweets from P I, this drives me nuts. When journalists take tweets from people, I don't know who f*****g this person is. And then they post their tweet as if its real journalism. That's journalism, right? What the hell? We have 322 likes on the tweet. It's not even a popular, There are a part in parcel of an elite police unit known as the us postal inspection service U S PIs, which has been fighting crime. Since the mail fraud, probably you and your tax fraud. You're going to make his people soon. You are going to know that these people at any minute, there's a 1200 postal inspectors who carry weapons, make arrests, execute, federal search warrants and serve subpoenas. They have even inspired a CBS series.


The inspector's haven't heard of it. Feel like it was that a inspiring, they made 5,759 arrests. Can you imagine a sense? Put your hands down at 1870 to <inaudible>. Have you ever been arrested? No. No. I got like, you know, when I was in high school, we were bad, but I never got arrested. I got like the CA once we took a, a three foot bong out into the alleyway to smoke for some reason and then the school and then obviously neighbors are like the kids or smoking a giant Bonge and the things that they call the cops came in there and we are so high. We were like trying to hide behind the bottle. I'm like so tragic. But my one friend who had the weed on him got arrested, but right now, But do you still smoke weed out of bongs or just do joint?


Sometimes. I mean, I don't really smoke that much weed anymore. I started again and now I'm remembering why the old, early onset. I just like, remember my phone number one. I just want to be as alert as possible. I like to be able to pay attention and chime in and stuff, but yeah, I'll smoke out of a box. My throat was getting really f****d up from the vapes. Yeah. Oh, why don't you don't like vaping? I don't think it gets me high enough. You remember when we thought vapes were like healthier than cigarettes? Are they the number when we were like vapes or a healthy? Oh cool. No, you're showing my a patriotic. It's a big factor to so long picture. Look at it. Wait. Huh?


What? Yes. If you smoke it up, I'll show you a three year. How do you smoke weed? And I'm going to tase, you know, We had a three foot. I'm a little bit interesting in that. I do like the attention I like attention to, but I also like not to do it. David Blaine, the bar is high. Mmm. What would we are just talking about? I caught whatever you have With the postal service or the postal service cameras. People. There's 1200 people that can arrest people. They carry weapons and they arrested him for fraud. Is that for the rest of them? For tat a fraud for a raising money for the private border. Right? Not wild. Right? That's all wild. Will kill cliff. Really good for you. Does it do it To give you a little buzz at all? Or no? No. It's good for like pain and stuff, right?


Yeah. 25 milligrams. Wow. I'm trying to find this picture. I have a picture. I had a three foot bong for a second. And for mother's day, one year I dressed it up like, like it was a boy. I put a hat on it and I was like sending my son to school. I put a little backpack on him. This is delicious of Instagram. By the way, it is tough. Right. Do you think that Instagram is going to be replaced by Real's will read. This is an Instagram, but I mean, its like at one point, because now your algorithms, like you have to get a certain number of likes and comments in order to get an algorithm at all. Right. Which is fine And is real. It's like more or less Like a tick tock it's on Instagram and just robs. It's great. It's like what to do with Snapchat to Instagram did stories when a Snapchat, you know, kind of went away.


Right? I haven't started doing the real is yet, but I'm excited. And I love having this outlet, especially during this time where we can do standup. I love, I love Instagram. A lot of comics just like promote are don't put their dog in their <inaudible> or listening to. I love them. When you look, see a movie and you comedians and make them so successful. But I really loved to making jokes on. It was like my favorite. Yeah. Yeah. It's a great place to do it. It's a fun way to like just you post a picture and say some funny it's a little writing exercise. Like journalists' are so f*****g lazy now. Like new's is just Jennifer Lopez posted this thing on Instagram. They just take all their news in all their photos from Instagram now. Yeah. Do you want me to stories?


Get written just from s**t we say on this podcast, just use it in the story. It's crazy. Well, I'll see you on like the internet, like Twitter, we'll be out. You posted a picture with me and Owen Smith I believe. And it was like one of the days you said one thing, I don't even remember what it was, but the internet had blown and I could tell, cause I was tagged in the picture. Have you? So all of these people were commenting and I saw you later and it was not a different day for you in any way. If you were to not affect you where I was like, I wonder if he like, because it was just like, boom, boom, boom. I was getting all these notifications. I was just so funny that you didn't right. Was probably when they didn't like video games or something. You feel like you got, I mean, he, it was like, I feel like two years ago you got like super famous, like super, super, super famous.


Did it feel like it was like two years ago? <inaudible> I don't know what happened. You always famous. You were famous, but then you became a religion. Yeah. I think it's a cumulative thing. If you just keep moving to keep putting out Podcasts yeah. And then people were more and more people listening to them and then two, many people will send it to you write it and then it becomes this thing. Yeah. And then its like every word you say, is there like what would you have a responsibility to? No, I'm a f*****g moron. Which is a terrible thing. Like if people are getting advice from me, like I don't even take my own advice. A lot of times don't listen to me. What are your fun to listen to and talk too is because you're like humble and you're willing to entertain ideas and are yours. And you're asked the right way. I think it's so that we Are talking about before though, you don't get married to your ideas.


I've been married to my ideas before it's gross. It's gross because they need to defend him and you a lie and you manipulate your words to try to make it seem like your right when you're not running with it. What is in that? I think it was in that, that same book we brought up so many times you get dopamine when your biases can for confirmation bias. When a someone agrees with a wrong idea that you say you get dope. I used to enjoy winning like arguments like that. And then now I want to do like, honestly, like when I have someone on the podcast, it saying something really ridiculous, but I know is horse s**t that I'm like, okay, this is my opportunity to just exercise this thing. And I want, I'll just speak nice and slow.


And like, why do you think that? Like what, what is it what's going on? Like tell me how you make an, what about this? And I'll give them a posing ideas, but I won't be married to them. I'll say, well, that doesn't make any sense because this yeah. But I'm not seeing in a mean way. I'm like, I'm trying to try, like when someone is like, especially someone say something real that they don't even really think through. They just say, this is like a predetermined pattern of behavior. A conglomeration of ideas that I've adopted is this ideology I'm going to push this forward no matter what. And those people are fascinating because when you talk to them, they're f*****g married to those IDs and they don't even know them, a married to a stranger. You get married to a stranger's and you're arguing with him about some s**t they hadn't thought through at all.


And they all came and the odd I've had people fall apart and it's so fascinating because like I've been wrong about a thousand times on this f*****g podcast or more. But when there's a moment, if I know I'm wrong, I'll be like, Ooh, okay. That's not right. And that, that this specific podcast today, all the time, everything you've said, You are able to change your mind after getting new information. Well, you should, a lot of people, is it science like that? Your trying to prove yourself wrong or you're trying to like that We are it's ego. But even in science, it's a real issue. When people come up with the new scientific discoveries that other scientists didn't recognize, there's a lot of f*****g blow back. A lot of people get angry, scientists get pissy or they get really egotistical. It it's super, super disheartening.


When you take all of your information from like archeologists, but then one archeologist will find some new discovery that like predates civilization. Like I've seen it with Graham Hancock. I've seen it with Graham Hancock. I've seen it with Robert Schoch, who is his geologist from Boston university who is talking to this archeologist about these geological findings that show up water or erosion than the outside of this things that could have only taken place at 9,000 BC, which would predate all that Egyptian construction like way earlier than they thought it was. And this guy mocking him and laughing as a scientist. And instead of going fascinated, because this is his field of study, he's a f*****g geologist. Okay. And he's saying these watermarks can only be created by an erosion. This is water or erosion.


This is not wind and sand. This has water. They sing. I'm a geologist. I have sent these images, this cropped images to other geologists. They've agreed with me. This guys just mocking him. And I'm like, Oh my God, it's ego. He doesn't want to think that he's been teaching and writing books All of these years about how old the Spanx is, how old the pyramids are and he's been wrong. And he doesn't want him to. And you're like, Oh no. So it exists in everything. Even in the people that we would lie on the most for information, they are married to their ideas. He should have been fascinated. It should of been like, wow, well you have to, right. As far as my boss right now, you got a new book, dude, when you get this crazy new to me, Every that I will look at it. It looks like there's many errors of construction.


Because if you go deep, deep, deep into the Sanders and older era, it's a very distinctive area that they built things differently then. And then this era does it do it this way. And it's like, they can get it narrowed down to these. E-box it's f*****g fascinating. But meanwhile, this guy's ego. Wouldn't let him see it. And you're watching him. You're like, wow. Like what civilization was from 14,000 years ago? Well, if they've, since then they found them. They found the actual civilizations, like go Beckley TAPI. That's a hundred percent more than 12,000 years old. Oh 100% without a doubt was filled in 12,000 years ago. So the guy was wrong. But meanwhile, his ideas were his, he clutched 'em like a baby. It was protecting from a f*****g storm.


There is so much of that in medicine, especially when there's new solutions and s**t, you know, like I was reading about the M a board certification for veterinarians. A lot of these veterinarian's have to learn wrong information to pass this test, to get board certified. A lot of it, if it's already been debunked because its like older veterinarian, something that was true 30 years ago now has been debunked and they have to like learn all this archaic s**t just to pass this arbitrary test. Remember the food chain, you know, <inaudible> Five servings of bread, a day, eight potatoes. But that pyramid right on top, there was a fish. It was just like one piece of fish. That's right.


A little piece of steak. The fact that we used to think that it was good for us. Well that's the bread cream cheese and, and beef and didn't he die, But he has it. No, this is the thing. People always like this is Atkins fell on the ice and broke his head. Welcome to There was off balanced from all of that grape cheese. No you're wrong. I remember I was talking about As a kid, that healthiest thing that you could eat was like a blueberry muffin. No, that's it. But been eating a lot of blueberry muffins and they really do make you look at like a blueberry, you know? No, I love it. No, no, no. I liked my, the problem with amazing about it. It looks good at all weight.


So it's hard to lose weight, but you also look like you're like f*****g strong as s**t. I look fertile. We were like, yeah, you look like a f*****g break out of Baron. Yeah. What the truth right now? I'm like, do you work out harder? Like, are you like to work out a lot to do you enjoy working out? Yeah it does. That was out ever a thing that like helped you when you were getting over booze. It was like, Oh exercise. We started doing yoga because I was very detached to my femininity. Obviously it got to this job, but my mom was like, my mom's very like Sportsy. They can't get the word I wanna say. But you know, she, so she was always very like, lets just wait sports, know dolls, all this stuff. So I was, it had no attachment to, and then with yoga I kinda got really like girly in it and it helped me in the, just the body weight stuff really helped.


But now, and I like to interject to it, but I'm not f*****g doing jujitsu during the show is about spitting in each other's mouths. Right. When you're doing it, it no geek two, which is, you know, you're a f*****g likers and stuff and now it's really close on it. It's so sweaty and so gross. I know you can contract it through balls, sweat. I know what the f**k. Okay. Yeah for sure. But you, it does improve your immune system. Oh fun though. It was the most fun. It's the most fun exercise. You're doing math problems on people's bodies. It's incredible. It's so cool. But you know what I want to ask you. I can't get weights anymore. They don't sell weights anymore. You know its hard. What did we, can you get it? They are sold out a way. It's because everyone is a quarantine. You ever tried to get in shape. No, not nuts because no Jim's are open.


That's the other thing, California, all of these gems, how many of these gyms are going to stay up til you see those? Could we get one of those pods where they have like people are surrounded and like certain rap pods were going out. No it unzip. I'll get you some weights. Tell me, Could you tell me what I've seen? No, no better than me or Jim is ever going to be the same. No, well, no, no. I think this is the first of all its going to yeah. May be. But like three years from now is going to take a wild for people to get over to the store. But also the online stuff. I think that the, everything, a lot of things can exist online and it's sucks. Cause its harder with the willpower. I think that like doing a yoga class on a zoom has a very difficult for a moment for me. Like I like taking classes because I get competitive s**t and I'm going to beat the person next to me. It's just part of my motivation.


Whether it's healthy or not, you know, or like the instructor yelling at you or ever trying to impress somebody, you know, whatever the f**k you. Yeah. Yeah. That's why you're not going to get that from zoom. You D it's definitely its like zoom Comedy right, right. Like Blake a Mark Norman. It was like methadone Comedy so I can what the real fix it. Yes. It's like we have worked on our whole lives to a, you know, get precise timing and like a two second delay changes, f*****g everything. Yeah. You know, it's like, Oh, you know, for a second, by second, like if I was doing a Comedy out of the window or the short and it was, you couldn't have at the same time and they ended up not being able to do it cause of regulation stuff. But yeah, they had to have a ten second delay.


Ah, and it was, first of all, I was doing it like a Podcast with Eleanor Carrigan, my f*****g Angell and we were like joking and stuff. But that, that delay. So I would say something that I was like, this is gonna f*****g right. And that's what she'd be talking. I'd be half of a singer and looking at waiting 10 seconds, like one Mississippi to me and then I look, it, it would bomb. I'm like, f**k it, it wasn't like watching a 10 out of amazing how we're so conditioned to have that immediate gratification that like a clap. Yeah. And then just, even on zoom, like doing like talk shows or zoom Podcasts, which I really do not like doing just that, that one second f***s up the flow and that Yeah. Well it's also there's are the energy that people have within their, in the room with, right? Like that's one of the things that Comedy, that people don't talk about.


It it's like a hypnosis thing going on. There's a sharing of energy. The laughs are physically feeling them. You are not going to get that Relationship. It's like we do need each other. And also the energy that the audience gets from each other, being shoulder to shoulder with another person that contagious and also the home court advantage have you're in my f*****g house. Not like you're in your bed, snuggle that Rosie like that. No, that's not trying to explain to someone. And by the way, to where he can be looking at something else at any time and try to explain to non-complex that if you watch a comedy special or if someone's comedy special, that's a maybe 70% as good as seen on the line. First of all, it's a tough, because filming as special as a kind of tense, so you are not lose and when you're loose, you're funny.


So it's hard for people to be loose. And then it's also weird because that is the f*****g napping in the room thing. Its like 30 or 40%. It was like this feeling you get when you're there with you, like you're there or are you having fun? And its right now, hi. Yeah. Right there. But when you're watch it at home and you just sit and back and you're you're you're alone. I was starting to cut out a lot of applause breaks and stuff on specials because at home she cuts out there. Right. You know, all the standing ovation has just got a bit much. No, but I just mean like when they're there, they're going to laugh a little longer at home. They're like, ah, moot now move on up. You know what I mean? You don't want to hear that. Have them have to hear other people laugh.


I always add some men. You know, That is a weird, because I have heard that from people adding What? No, you don't have track. Maria Bamford did a special for her, just her parent's in her living room. So if we could start shooting specials for a small crowds. Yeah. She's hilarious. She's just so funny. That sounds like something she would do. She did the stand up just for her parents are on the couch, in their living room. Right. That's so it was a great idea. I liked what a, like a uniquely herself person she has. That's just my favorite thing in people Tried COVID comedy while ago. Remember when a, what was the comic's name that you put that special ed on HBO with no audience at all. But I know you're in Michael.


Oh directed it, but I know I'm like, what's up? F**k Michael and Michael drew. Michael you know, drew, Michael did a, a special with no audience. I'm like, Hmm. It was when you're at home. You mean it was a weird, but it was like, Oh we took a swing. I will always appreciate a swing I guess. Oh yeah. Hey, why don't we? Because it's a different thing. Right? They used to be like live performances that weren't really stand up. Do you remember Eric? Boghossian yes. Yeah. He used to do these live performances that were, they were not really stand up. They were these things, you know, there were these stories he would tell right now. Do you remember that?


Yeah, I remember that. Do you remember there's this guy? Josh Faden. Did you ever know him? Because he's so funny is this while we would do crazy s**t, like he would go on stage and just like run in place. And it was like so weird at like not, and then he would just like Keep doing it and like people start walking out and then he was just like, keep running in place. And then by three minutes in that you're dying, laughing and you have no idea why hell do a thing where he like accidentally f***s up the MC and it falls apart. He's like, huh. And it, but it's so funny. That's like tangled up and it's like, you want to hate it? Honestly, like as a comic, like I'm looking at your face. You want to do, but it's so charmingly fun. It was just some weird like thought exercise or performance art or something or Reggie Watts too.


Like he makes me want to make sounds funny. Or do you know what it means? Reggie can do so many different things. That's the thing about Roger is he's like Josh, A big moment was the 10 seconds. Right? There was a shooting out a f*****g Comedy. You can even see what kind of lights or are they Jamie really well before that in Mitzi short sex dungeon. And what was that? But the darkness of a stage it's confusing. Like they would not want the convenience. Do you like how dark the main room got? When do you remember when I'm talking about when they just the week before then they put those like lights up. There's like crazy right now. Yeah. I think I liked it When I was getting used to it.


I looked at the pictures, looked beautiful. The truth it was taking. When do you guys think it comes back up? We're all guests and like everything we're talking about with it. Good book to the LA Jolla comedy store for two weeks and shut down. I think it's going to be six months. Two a year. Oh yeah, No. I just move my tour to fall of 2021 theaters. Whew. If someone can figure out the ventilation system, if there is some, I don't know why this were not figuring this out. What if someone comes up or the rapid test that that is going to fix everything to rapid test you, test someone as they are walking in. It's a long ass line line is going to take a lot longer than it will normally, but you can have holding rooms, you know, You could have, you would completely get rid of the virus if you could do it.


Like how long is it gonna take for our emotional trauma to heal of like, remember the days when you would just be in a comedy club, in a waitress in the dark would hand you a drink with a straw and you just put it right through your mouth is going to be different. Our whole earth is going to be different. I mean, imagine just taking a drink from a girl at a bar and putting into your mouth Fowchee was saying that we're not going to be able to shake hands anymore. How can we get a date rape drug to people anymore? Now it's like so upsetting, but you can't let me the drug anymore. Or I mean, it's like, what is this doing to our brains? Just in terms of it, It's taking us go closer and closer to virtual reality. Yeah. Why don't you think it was like an ego death? I feel like we've all been forced into this Epic dose of mushrooms. We didn't mean to take. And it's like, everyone has to face their mortality, which I think is all we're doing all day anyway, but it's now it's like, Oh, we're watching death.


There's the depth of are of being entertained. There's a depth of going out. There's the death of meeting people. The did the shaking hands, the death of actual people. And I think it was Tim Delane. And I were talking about how like nine 11. And everyone's like comparing this to nine 11 in some ways. And the fact that it's just like a trauma, but nine 11 brought us together. Just there was this like lets Go out until two in the morning. They're not going to f*****g win. And everyone was instantly friends with each other and now everyone's instant enemies with each other. I walked down the street and people like with the foot, put your, pull your book of masks on a mass stuff. So funny people are so crazy, but my stuff is crazy. It is f**k you. It's like outside in the sun like, Hey man, it's not even possible. You don't even know what to do. There was a guy I went to Venice beach and there was a guy in a wheelchair who and I used to work with kids with special needs.


So I always liked to make iconic, says hello to people in a wheelchair. One sentence, if that makes you the most likable. Oh that was a special ed or whatever. And a big deal. I'm a hero. Gave it up to tell Dick jokes to do God's work. But so I always liked to acknowledge because of there's some people don't want to be rude. I want to stare. And then there never looked at there. Never talked about that's where I'm always do jokes about people Milt. You're like do like do everything to make them a part of Things right. Equal you'll jokes about the course. It's like, there's no punching down. Like shut the f**k up. But so, so I was like, I was doing my little, like aren't I a good citizen? Like eye contact with this guy. He goes, why are a f*****g mascot? It was like, and it was because I gave him the, I conduct it.


It was so funny. I was like, I was it wasn't one of my blogs. Day's my new blog only at Patrion. And it was like, I just turn the thing up because I didn't wanna focus on, I don't want to be like videotaping a guy in a wheelchair, but it literally went to the funniest thing ever had some amazing that Kahn is the most offensive board. But if someone calls me, but I think that my dad is so funny. We need a new word. Cause if a guy calls me in a car, like I'll just start laughing now. No enough women though. There's not enough Manatee. We need a herd immunity for it. No, I know I've got the antibodies, the antibodies for a guy calls you to kind of like it just so funny. That's where it's like someone said can in both of us will like a good word.


It is so good. It's short. It's cutting. It got a tee in the end of it. I'm like, b***h, b***h is still a pretty good for me. If someone calls me a b***h, I'm like, damn right. Pitch is softer than that though. As a sound or the thing is like, think about No, that is sharp. Razor sharp calling a guy at the time is always like you said a cut. Like you said As well. I use it in 90% of the time for a minute. I call them <inaudible>. Yeah. Right. But if a guy calls me a b***h, there's something. So ninety's about it. There is something so retro. Yeah. You know, We live in Australia tho they toss it around like a beach ball, that's it. Right. And then b*****s their car. Right. I don't know what is there can be Fannie is they don't, they don't use it that much for girls though that they use it for each other.


You know, it's a joke. He term like, yeah, you f**k what's up f****r. Like they, Hey man, we'll have a c**t. He's a good kind of like, he's a good cop as a normal thing for them to say, so it feels You f*****g c**t. They came over here. We are. And they, you know, they realize like, Oh Jesus, I got to remap my, my, my language because it is a different thing over here. It's dangerous. The one that gets me as f**k face one that gets me. I can't is one, but I can think of it. No f**k face. You can get away with too. And it's got up, but it's got so much power f**k face Throws me actually is one of other women call me h****r or a w***e. When a girl is like, Hey w***e. I'm like, Jesus, that always or disorganized as me.


But if that's your friends, so it was like, Hey h****r, he's a s**t. Right. Girls, girls for doing that for awhile, they are calling each other h****r. What's that like A lot like sometimes like, wow, you, You are a f*****g s**t or do you gotta be like, Right. If you were saying, you guys can call it this, but where there could be, if you don't want any more close your life Or the whole time being a boy. Right. We use chairs, I think was like ergonomic chairs. I think they're to give birth. I don't know what's happening. Very good for you back. This is what's happening. Here's the best. Yeah. It feel like I could get out of here. And my body posture has always liked so much better. No. I think we came into a series of conclusion that you guys need your own show.


Like legitimate. Like what are we going to do here? I think you'll get the job that we need to do it. I can, we have this on a team and everything. You can do it or are we going to take calls or give advice? Or maybe we draw from a bond with someone called in and we trauma bond with them. Yeah. Do you guys need a, like a neon sign behind you? No, I want to do that. Says Andy f*****g Letterman is so bad behind me or my podcast. I wanted it so bad. It was just call it the Letterman. Podcasts if anybody wants to be famous or if anybody wants to buy me that neon pay for my eggs, I get frozen. Right? All the way I'll pay to freeze your eggs or are you good on my person that you guys can make it 20 grand? Right? Wow. That's pretty cheap. That's so cool.


I have a thought of a deal. I thought it was like, You mean you could, if it's a boy that you can name and if it's a girl, you can go, okay. All right, I'm going to name it Butch. Right. But the girl Wellbeing, I'm going to name it is a little frozen, a little frozen concept. You know, We didn't even have a 50 Maybe. Yeah. You should have a kid. Maybe I feel like would be a really, I think I went there's so much. I think that'd be a really good mom. And my, my nieces are like my f*****g favorite. My nephew is to, I love them so much. I don't want to say I don't, but I had talked to my nieces and nephews everyday and they love them. Yeah. My niece is eight. We've been P we just started becoming pen pals.


I've watched the video, You know? Yeah. Now that the mail is going to be cancelled. Well, they do. I know just when we became. Yeah, but, and my little niece who's, For she a, Oh my, Oh my God. My eight year old send me, I gave her a snowglobe of Hollywood and I was like, whenever you miss me, they are in Boston. And like, whatever you ask me to just think about. And so she's sent me, it was for years ago, I was sent it to her and she sent me a picture of the snuggle up. And she goes, I think about you all the time on to me. I miss so much. It's like, ah, I'm going to those rapid tests. They're Is something that happens. Like the biological clock. Shit's real eye. Look at babies. I'm like, I want to f*****g put that baby in my mouth. I also look at it. It's not in this climate.


It's like, I have a compulsion to her when I know they were so cute, but we just want to scream for them. I just don't want to miss out on like the experience we are on this earth to have kids. I don't, it doesn't look that fun to me. Its only purpose is to bear children. Any, you know what it does is it doesn't look that fun. You know? My friends seem very happy in tired, but it doesn't seem like a lot in, but I just went, I look at my store, I have two brothers and my twin brother is to girls and my older brother's two boys. I will have a hermaphrodite, but I'm, it's like a perfect line. It's just like there. So perfect. There's so many other people's kids. I'm going to help them love them. And I just don't want to be back in session. I think I will be.


I think, I think it took awhile a lot of fun. You mean I do have a compulsion to adopt though. I don't know. I rescue animals so much that it sort of is like, is it that kind of like getting your kid's from a breeder or getting your kid's from a breeder? Like they adopt a kid too? Or did you see this SIA? That the singer adopted 18 and 19 year olds? Two black guys. Okay. Like she adopted, I don't know how you adopt a grown man. She just did it. I thought, I didn't know. You could adopt people that were over 18, some weird thing to do. And if they're not all the way, every call you back, she was like 40 something. I think every guy you've ever dated based a little bit into adoption, I know you have to pay for them to take some of my men look at like Madonna or how many convenience do you think you have dated?


I'm like three or is it weird that I have a data? Any comedians? I know it's like I honestly, and I think I'm done with like, I'm like, I think I went through all the ones though. Right. But they did one ever when it was open Mike or, and it was like, Oh, he's like, man, What do you feel? It is fun this year. It's constant because it is fun. But it's really fun. There's a little bit of a like whose bit is that as mine. It's like when you're in a fight. Mmm. I guess you could, if you were, you were like, if you like sort of workshop a bit together. No, no, I love you said that. Can I have that? Or if you take it, I'm going to tell people you're raped me. Right. There was a weird relationship though. A, when a woman comic in a male comic, I get together and one of them was right in the other one's joke's and you can tell, and you're like, Oh, that's her writing.


Right. Well that's his right? Yeah. And I'm the worst because if I write a joke for someone, but if I write a joke for someone and I'm in the back of the room and someone's like doing the bet and it gets the biggest laugh, obviously. Cause that really does happen because I'm so good. But you're a great joke writer know? But I like I'll I cannot help but go in, like I f*****g like s**t. I just wanted to just get stitches. I'm so sorry. Gavin Newsome. Do I get money? If I ran out that I wrote that joke is the one who wants to give you a SETI. But if you've ever dated a comedian, but I think if I was dating comic and I saw them do poorly, I wouldn't be able to f**k them again. I will be rough. I will, if I have to respect them when I have a hard time. Well, I wouldn't like you can't like openly did someone, you don't respect.


You know, If you're dating a girl when she's a comic and she sucks, that is going to be rough two for a guy as well. Right. Right. And then all of a sudden she gets real good. And it should that she passed as you are using your jokes. I know it's a, it's a fun experience. Like I do remember that, but you can also do that. And just friendships with comics. I just have so many people, I call about jokes. That's so fun. But for me, I had some Darwinian instinct to be like, do not pice. Where do you eat? Yeah. Like do not. Toxify this environment. This is the only place you feel safe is the only place that you know, why any of these guys, if they were like, damn man, it was like, wow, No. I think some girls though that feel like no one gets them, but comics. And that's why you see girl comics wind up with male comics.


Cause like for a woman to be the funny one, I think I'll just a lot of guys are intimidated by that. Like if a guy was a regular guy with a regular job and he's dating a funny comment who is going on stage murdering of the comedy store in the main room like that. But there are plenty of guys that don't feel that way. So it's just like, <inaudible> wow. You really know how far up <inaudible> do you have to wear a strapless? No. No. I just think it's different kind of person, but there's a lot of guys can for sure. I mean everybody's different, but there are a lot of guys who have a problem with a woman being the funny one. You also, you have to say, this happens a lot where a guy who has nothing to do with Comedy is like really into it.


And you're like, Oh great. Like a man, it doesn't care how and then they go, no, no, no, no, no. They seem to do stand up and they're like into it. And then they go, Oh, you know, I always kinda wanted to get into common and get out of this car and living, I have had that happen in so many times Only date because they wanted to get into Comedy and your establishment, You know, Kurt told me this because I used to always feel like if someone hit on me, they didn't think I was funny or something. And he's like, they could be hitting on you because they like that. You're free. No, but here's the difference between men and women right here in their cars. If there was a guy and he's dating a girl and she's like, you know, I always thought about doing Comedy guy could be like, you should, if you're so stupid, they wouldn't even realize that girl is f*****g just to get a new.


No, they would have no idea. As long as the guy that's the guy f****r, I'll be right. Joe it's not even like saying, I don't want you to be a comedian. It's just saying, I don't want to date an open mic or like you are going to start your going to humiliate me by being the worst comedian in the room As the difference between men and women. If a girl is hot, a guy, I will still f**k. Or even if she's in open miker yeah. It will take her to the show. There's some dude who is like a, a, a headliner or on the road when you're doing theaters. And we got this really pretty girl friend and all of a sudden wants to be a comic. Do you like it? Well, I think I f****d myself a couple of times because I always felt like, okay, don't emasculate. This guy laugh at his jokes. So I would laugh. And his jokes that aren't funny.


And then they were like, well, if she thinks I'm funny, I must be hilarious that he wants to start doing Stand down to on the spectrum. You do that. Have a lot of troubles, fake laughing like that. I'm like, I faced, it's like, look at them. As I remember Tony, when it's being like, Oh, I see what you're dealing or not laughing. That was like, Tony is, it just was like, To punny in this moment. Like can't fake laugh. It's not that Tony was not the f*****g funny. And I have been like, No, there's no one, no one has better puns. And Tony is, you know, Quarantine. I've gotten so close with Tony. I a lot. I get him. I love him. He's awesome. I, I accept his craziness or I'll remember when Tony smoked, when Tony didn't go vegan isn't even in now or something. And then we started eating meat.


I remember when he was in bad shape. I remember when he was a door guy and he was like a mess. And I used to yell at them to stop smoking cigarettes To be in vegan, was going to help him with his health or, you know, to see like, it was good, but he doesn't need to lose. Weight is a thin guy. It was tiny. He's got a crazy metabolism. I'm like, you can eat everything. And just because it just burns off of him, right? Yeah. He's going to be so happy. We are talking about them is going to be Kevin. Did you know what Mitch Burroughs's is? He's a, he's at the comedy store too is so funny. He's a door guy. He's so funny though. That is one of the guys that like, that's his way into the Comedy story. Talking about that. And we were doing the documentary too. It's one of the coolest things about the store is that everybody gets treated, let her come in the door.


People, the people that worked the cover boots, it doesn't matter if you're, if you're a comic, you're a comic. And we saw a lot of us like whether it's Duncan or Ari or so many of his people started out as door people. So many guys. So how many guys, I think that the common denominator in the comments, the comments it's, these are people that want it and R at all f*****g costs, or like when people like your comments are coming to that place as toxic, it's like, you're throwing s**t around like that. I spent from 5:00 PM to two in the morning, every night for like four years. Like, you know, it's sort of like the amount of time we play, It's not toxic. It's a wild place. And sometimes weird s**t happens there. And sometimes, you know, it's annoying.


And sometimes people bomb and sometimes people feel like they bomb because the person before them was two gross or to do this or to that, there is a lot, look at it. It's a f*****g dangerous place. Like I've had s****y sets of that. Yeah. A nightclub, like one of you remember when there was all of a sudden, like a wave of a white female comedians are in the middle of black lives, matter of going like, Oh wait, we are victims of being treated badly by male comics. It was just like, we don't want to post about black lives matter any more. It's embarrassing. It's making us uncomfortable when couldn't light black people were the victims again. So, so I, one girl had written something where she was like, I, you know, and I have to have male comics walk me to my car at the end of the night. And it's like, okay, wait.


So there are nice enough to walk to your saying the night it's not a comedy that's dangerous. The night time is dangerous. Darkness is dangerous as well. Nightclubs when people drink is dangerous. I mean, I would have one to not want to be a woman would not want to be someone who want someone wants to f**k all the time. And you know, walking by, Do you have personalities like us? No, <inaudible> I told her that we do a great job of propelling that with them. If it gets harder, I think it's harder. I mean, there's some aspects of being a man. I'm sure that are probably more difficult, but I think overall the physical vulnerability part is huge, but it's definitely huge in a confidence business. Right. Because the thing about standup is a lot of it.


It's a confidence because you know, Yeah. Well, I definitely started wanting to become a weapon. Like I was like, when I started doing jujitsu and stuff was like, this is how it's supposed to be like, and I remember during the me too movement and stuff, I was always like, there's something missing here where it's like a conversation with young girls about like learning to be, to stand up for yourselves and be strong. And it's not Victor, you would get called a victim shaming. It's like, no, it's about you have no control over the outside world. So it's protect yourself as much as you can. Yes. When I was a black out drunk, I was literally, I was my own bodyguard leaving to go to the bathroom for f*****g six hours. And my body's just there. It's like, you need, like, to me, it's like becoming the strongest I can be with him. I'm a woman are a man. And being able to, because tape years ago is like, if I was old, man, I'd want to be the strongest woman in the world.


I was like, Tate, I just want to be high. Like, what are you doing now? But now I get it. I got to that age where I went, Oh yeah. Like I want to be able to f**k people if they come at me. And also it's like, just getting your intuition, OnPoint, you know, it's like that Gavin de Becker book, that gift of fear. I read that in to change my life because it was like, I think when you're told for so long, I think that the part that gets tricky is that insidious people telling you you're crazy. You're psycho, you're too emotional. You're too sensitive. Like calm down, relax, hearing that for so long. My programming was the most f****d up thing because when I did actually feel someone being dangerous, I would override my intuition and just being dramatic. Right. And just be in crazier or I'm going to accuse this person of something. But our gut is in that book, talks about all the women that he interviewed that had either been attacked or assaulted.


They always said, I knew something was f*****g off about that guy. They knew it. Even though he was helping them with their groceries or opening the door for them, they were like, Oh, my body knew there was some off about that guy. I think there's something really dangerous about, not about having a very limited amount of experience with crazy people or with dangerous people, because you don't know real violent people or a real dangerous people. You have been around them. And so you don't know that you could just run into them. You could take a wrong turn on fourth street and all of a sudden there's no violent, crazy person. And yet you don't know what they are like, you don't know to get away. Nice. You don't like it. There's this instinctual is nice. I don't know if it's talked to us or whatever. It's like, you want to, don't want to be rude to someone, but it's like, but its like, it doesn't like what I want, like what am so glad I learned and what I would want to impart upon my niece's and even my nephews, its like your safety and yours and it doesn't even have to be physical safety.


You're emotional safety. You're like, okay, what you want is the most important thing for that. So that's why boundaries aren't bad. You know, it's just like set them up and like, but for me, like when we go through the Comedy is for anyone who's ostensibly crazy. I'm usually not scared of those people. The people advertising their crazy. Those are all the people you have to worry about. It's the quiet person in the corner. You're hearing anything from Now, right? Yes. Along a lot of times this guy has friends, right? This is a guy who is cool, but then he's got a friend who's f****d up and he doesn't know his friend's f****d up. Yeah. And you know, when you're around this person all the time and they are slowly getting closer and closer to you and look it's and can be f*****g, really scary. You know, I've met a lot of men that are scary human beings and capable of violence, like real estate, like Whoa, someone's murdering somebody new that person who murdered somebody.


That's a tricky feeling. He like, what, Why building up your own s**t is so important because you can't control a crazy person outside of use. So like all these things like men needed to stop. It's like, yes, of course. But also how do we protect ourselves? How do we, it's not men though. It's those men, A particular people that are doing these awful things, the particular murderers or rapists or themes it's it's like we have a real problem with lumping people into groups. Right, right, right. No. And where we are so disconnected from our intuition. Cause I'll have it sometimes like a woman will come up to me and I meet and greet and I'm like, I have a weird feeling about this person. I can't tell you why I can't articulate it. I know it's dense. We'll be the person that seems really nice. I have a weird feeling about this. I need this person to go.


You know, whereas other people are grabbing me and shaking me and I feel fine. But this person like just being able to like for f*****g know, you never, never know. You can't look at each other as groups because we went to have blind spots. Your going to have these believe all women blind spots or believe all men, blind spots, those are bad. And some people just fix on you fixate on you get obsessed. Their social media. There is a girl that was, I'm like a runner up on American idol. She was doing a meet and greet and someone just walked up and shot her crazy person that thought they knew her. I had someone, you know, I had a security issue with someone who thought they were emailing with me for four months. They thought we had a relationship. You know? And when you're in that kind of sorry about that. Why do you mean All the different Whitney I know. And then everything in your posting on social media feeds into there idea that they think your talking to them right on schizophrenia is out there.


There's a lot of really sick people out there. Right. Percent of people in this country are schizophrenia. Yeah. Think that's the right number is C if it was right. Number of his, what percentage of Peter? What would you guess? What percentage of people Schizophrenia? I mean, it's sort of like a guessing game is the kind of people I know it's like these are the kind of people that are like going out of their way to get evaluated. Right? Yeah. Well, yeah. Right, there's probably more of a Hell. Yeah. It was gonna say it's probably going to be a little bit more than whatever it would be. What would you think? It would be 2%. I don't want to me now you should have so much of this stuff. So What about you? This has been a long intervention. This whole f*****g show. So much of the study to me. Or are you talking to me? Right? How much of the chute is so under-diagnosed though, right?


1%. 2%. Yup. One bit. So as an estimate at 1.1%, and these are just the people that have gone in for medical attention that knows the ones running around that needed to do it. 8% are untreated. The 1.1% They roughly estimate the ad in 48. If that's just the line up at the comedy store percent. But if I'm going to tell you, I have bought a lot of shirts from Boone. I will say that I'm lucky I buy seven new shirts were so happy to see. He wasn't. Cause I will get scared about people that older weirdos were like, where do you live? But with nothing to lose his yeah. You were like, job has to have people's shirts where they don't even know where he's got them from. But I saw me on that are so walking flea market was like, what am I crazy?


Or is this still here? Listen, kids was wrapped this up where more than three hours right now. Is there a diet I have to be sorry. I'll never forget it. You guys agree Right you should do a show together that you guys have Epic chemistry. It, it would be the best show and food chicks shows are so hot right now. Hot. Why are you saying that right now? What are some sort of trend to control, but also to have a problem with it? You have to be my Jaimie though. I'm off camera and say yes. I think that I, how often is it that you see female comics getting along publicly and supporting each? I have like my girl let that this thing when they make it like this Oprah on every woman should it's like, no, no, no, no, no, no. I'm not friends with all female comics just because we're automatically a female comics fan.


I have little asked me to talk to every day I talked to you all the f*****g time, body McFarlane like, well this is not a conceptual, right? Those were all funny people. What you have in common little Esther is hilarious. Bonnie McFarlane is hilarious. There is so funny. And there are so it just so funny and we don't feel competitive. There's a lot of like pitting each other against each other and competitive s**t. That's just like f*****g interest to do that. No you don't. You think where we are you talking about with the Comedy story the other night really does hold true that this is the least competitive era. Have any hair of Comedy and the most supportive one entrepreneurs. But we do, we support each other because of the internet, because it was not limited amount of slots. Like this is the thing that we were talking about with Jay Leno. Like back in his day, there was only one host at the tonight show that's right.


And everybody wanted that spot. When Johnny Carson left, there's a lot of people that wanted that spot One and there was another, then it went back to that one and then there's also, you've shown us that helping other comics helps you have plenty of pieces of pie, you know, let the water we love. I love you guys. You're so it's like, you should be such a piece of s**t. <inaudible> I think we should say really quick. Like I do think it's important to say like, as we go into this next chapter of like Joe, Rogan that a lot of people I think, I think a lot of people assume that like the, if someone's on your podcasts, that means they are famous. Like you've heard a lot of Cummings you have made a lot of comedians lives by having them come on this bike, but it's going to make me cry. I'm happy to do it.


You've probably saved people's lives, letting them come on. This podcast, I moved out of my car and he would be dead if it wasn't for your list, you would be sucking to jail. But it was because they came to represent to you to be f*****g some guy in a wheelchair, down in Venice. But I mean, truly I think a lot of people don't necessarily understand because it gets so many millions of views that like a lot of comics you've have a battery or like truly home land. He's a man, by the way, he is uncomfortable with this, which is cool. You had, you have to truly given people careers, or you have given people in their lives and their sanity, the following. I mean, it's really big deal. It's a big deal. It just made sense. It didn't, it didn't seem like sent anything. I ever had to think about it.


I just wanted to help out. I knew I can help. So just take funny people and put them on it and you still do it. I still do. I just did. Alli was on last week. She's awesome. So now everybody knows a funny is she is that that's where we're all supposed to do. Like we used to wait for the tonight show or we would wait for an HBO special. That's what we used to wait For we don't have to do that anymore. We help each other. It helps me two because then people trust me more. They're like, Oh, he knows funny people like these people he gets on or find out like, like, so they know like I'm not trying to give you a bad show that they have someone on it because they're cool Was like so many Canadians get a really famous and so successful and stop hanging out with other comedians or stop helping them to other comedians we see at a lot. Yeah. Because everybody gets, this is what it is, because I'll tell you because I've felt it myself, but it just fit.


Realize what it was when I stopped the, think, the thought process, you get scared because you have so much. You're like, Oh my God, it's so much everything so much. Like I want to keep this going in order to keep, just keep this gravy train rolling. I'm going to stop it. Stop saying f****d up. Things maybe we stopped doing Podcasts of comics and just concentrated on scientists. You could think you could really start thinking like that. And I know that people that have done it, a lot of famous comedians and get to a certain point, they don't wanna take any chances anymore. They don't take chances with their material or the things that got them to the dance. Now they are avoiding. Now. They don't want to like play and safer. They want slow down a little bit is not good for you. And I, I saw though, I felt that I felt as the podcast sort of ramping up on them, but you just got to do it.


You just got to keep doing it. But the way to do it is you get high. You get drunk. Sometimes you talk s**t, you have fun smarts talking to scientists, talked to, you know, it's a really interesting people that are authors and adventures. And like, yeah, you just do what you did. That's it. That's all I'm doing. But they may be able to help. COMEX is probably the best part of it for me, because I love, I love watching it happen. I love watching people does have a career, you know, because I know they can. We, all of us that are good, you get to a certain point where you making people laugh and you have good. If your dedicated to it, you could have a career or you just need to somehow or another B like not even, not even mentor, just someone opens a door for you.


So it says, come on in. Let's show everybody I'll call you. Right. Right. Yeah. And you also pioneered a sort of career and an art form that a lot of people wouldn't have known to do that have given them their livelihood. A lot of comedians who weren't going to get that five minutes out on the tonight show a lot of those comedians who work and to get that, sit-com like you paved a new route. No, it's not. A lot of you didn't have a podcast. And W none of us had Podcasts and then this f*****g corn does it happen, we would just be like, like sitting around, waiting for her, A girl called me up. And he's like, thank God you talked me into doing a podcast. Just because everybody else Do, you started at it in the car. It was right after or before. And that you're truly feeding peoples' kids. Right? I mean, its everybody, who's a comic defeating my eggs.


Rogan dysfunctional. If you have the ability to do a podcast, well, why wouldn't you, why wouldn't you like, let people know like more about how you think And more about It's so interesting. Cause my podcast is only light. I have like 30 something episodes and it's, you know, sometimes they interview, sometimes it don't, but there is people it's called, it's called me inspiration. I'm not aggressive know, but I want to start doing more of like there's these people who is like, they have therapy Podcasts and stuff and these different types of people that I would love to interview. Like I want to do more like the people that I love rather than just comedians or whatever to, but I'm a pretty successful. So <inaudible> on pockets is called a pop up.


I'll get it for you. But, and it needs it more so gave it to her. I have to be so bad. Okay. It was wrapped this up every night. I love you. You too. Thanks for doing this. And I'm glad you guys are going to do this podcast. I'm going to tell me again. I'm going to grow it. It all right. Wait, goodbye everybody. Bye. Woo. Thank you, friends, you for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you to blue moon beer. I get it delivered baby. In the next time you need a taste of the extraordinary open up a blue moon. Get a blue moon delivered to you by visit, get.blue moon beer.com to see your delivery options. Blue moon reach for the moon. Celebrate responsibly blue moon brewing company, golden Colorado.


All we're also brought to you by Harry's Harry's they're awesome raisers and a great deal of an amazing offer for listener's. In this show, new U S customers can redeem a Harry's trial set at Harry's dot com slash Rogan. You'll get a five blade razor featuring their new sharper blades, a weighted handle, a foaming shave gel with Allo oo and a travel cover to protect your blade. When you're on the go, just go to harrys.com/rogan and redeem your trial offer today. That's a good f*****g deal. Kids get on out there. We're also brought to you by Roka Roka and their dope f*****g eyewear.


That's all I wear. I will literally I where their reading glasses from my f*****g blind ass eyes. I where their sunglasses I where their tactical glass'. When I go to the gun range, the company is in fact the s**t and they want you to know. So they are going to give you a sweet deal. They are offering 20% off of your first purchase. When you enter rogan@checkoutatroca.com that's R O K a.com. Enter the code Rogan at checkout and save 20% off your first purchase. Check them out. They're the s**t. And so many people I was Right about come on Annie and Whitney together. One day, people we'll look back. No will go. That's how it started. That's how it started. Alright.


Love to you all. Bye bye.