
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode the podcast is brought to you by Buffalo Trace and they're damn good whiskey how good 2020 Distillery of the Year. San Francisco World Spirits competition has some of the best whiskey tasters in America judging hundreds of Whiskey's and Buffalo Trace one the most they have been operating in America since before America was America, they've been distilling whiskies in 1773 ever since the early American Is follow the Buffalo herds to the Kentucky River even operated during prohibition. They made whiskey for medicinal purposes. The master distiller in charges Harlan Wheatley, and he has been distilling at Buffalo Trace since 1995.


If the whiskey in the barrel is not ready to go into the bottle. It does not and they know this because they taste it all the oldest continuously operating distillery in America. Buffalo Trace Distillery has Ernst more than fair share of adversity floods fires Wars recessions and the prohibition they've endured them all in the pandemic won't slow them down. They're making more whiskey every day and now hand sanitizer as well the governor of Kentucky designated bourbon as essential during this time and I agree. It's a fucking awesome company fantastic whiskey, no wonder why they win all the awards distilled aged and bottled by Buffalo Trace Distillery 90 Proof Franklin County Kentucky, Buffalo Trace American family owned and independent.


We're also brought to you by Squarespace the host of Joe Rogan.com when you go to my website that is a website that is made by Squarespace and you can use Squarespace to make your own website. It's easy. I know you think I can't do it. I can't I can't you can if you know how to move files around on a desktop. You have all the skills required to make a big Beautiful website with Squarespace. They have a simple easy to use drag-and-drop user interface and gorgeous designer templates that will allow anyone to build a beautiful website which you can use to sell products and services of all kinds. In fact, you get a free online store with every website you build and you get a free domain name.


If you sign up for a year, you can promote your physical or online business and announce an upcoming event or a special projects and they have powerful e-commerce functionality. Analogy that lets you sell anything online you can customize the look The feel the settings the products and more with just a few clicks. Everything is optimized for mobile right out of the box. They have built-in search engine optimization free and secure hosting nothing to patch or upgrade ever and 24/7 award-winning customer support and you can try it for free. That's how confident they are. When you go to squarespace.com Joe get yourself a free trial then when you're ready to Launch use the offer code Joe to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain where also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app the cash app, which is the number one finance application in the known fucking Universe.


How about that? You probably already know the cash steps the easiest way to send money between your friends and family without holding that paper cash, but the cash app is also the best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app you can also Romantically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry as stacking SATs SATs short for Satoshi. Who's the legendary person who no one knows who it really is who created bitcoin I've been Street Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority and wouldn't it be great if the whole world work like that?


Yes. Well you can start here. Day and get yourself some Bitcoin with the motherfucking cash app. And of course when you download the cash app enter the referral code Joe Rogan one word. You will receive ten dollars and the cash app will send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Ren's fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo. We are very proud to announce it through this app in this promotion. We have raised a shitload of money and built several Wells and are in the process of building many more. So it's a win for everybody download. Cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today and use that promo code Joe Rogan all one word.


You get 10 bucks and 10 bucks goes to an amazing cause and last but not least. We are brought to you by four Sig Matic for Sig Matic in their fantastic mushroom coffee with lion's mane and chaga for somatic is a wellness company that makes coffee. That's actually good for you. It's wicious coffee. I know you like what are you saying? It's coffee with mushrooms. It has half the caffeine of regular coffee, but it's actually good for you. It has lion's mane mushroom, which is my favorite mushroom. It supports productivity and creativity during my busy day.


It actually is good for your brain. Plus it includes chaga, which is the king of mushrooms for immune support and you probably think it does this coffee tastes like mushrooms. It does not it tastes delicious. This mushroom coffee is also easier on the gut. It does leave you feeling jittery and all four Sig Matic products organic vegan and gluten-free. Every single batch is tested and a third party lab for heavy metals allergens bad bacteria yeast Moulds mycotoxins and pesticides to ensure their purity and safety. So, you know, you are getting the highest quality coffee and shrooms possible and best of all for stigmatic stands behind their products.


Unconditionally with a 100% money back guarantee love every sip or get your money back and they're gonna hook you up. JRE listeners get a sweet deal receive up to 39 percent off on their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim this deal. You must go to for Sig Matic.com / Rogan. This offer is only for JRE listeners, and it's not available on their regular website. Go to fo you are SI. GM atic for Sig Matic.com Rogan and get yourself some delicious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out.


My guest. Today is a hilarious comedian podcaster. She's done a lot of awesome shit. She's a great person. I love hanging out with her and talking to her. She's just cool as fuck. Please give it up for the Great and Powerful Nikki. Glazier The Joe Rogan Experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Hello. Hello Joe Rogan. So I saw you tweet. This is how the talking about and you said you were going to shave your head in solidarity for a friend who has cancer and then you like actually there's no friend like oh no. Yeah, I think he's going crazy.


Yeah going off. The fucking deep is what I was sad. Yes the proud. I think we all are and I try I've been trying to like check in on everybody because all of us comedians have not had our medicine, you know plant this is like We're junkies were laughs junkies. We really are no and I didn't realize how much I mean I know I missed it. But I did one weekend in Houston. I like a month this month or so ago and then right right away. I was like, oh my God, I got my fix like I'm and then, you know talking to all these people that are doing like Mark Norms doing chosen a park. Yep, you know Bert crushes doing drive-ins like I'm doing them to are you yeah, I'm going out next weekend.


What does it have you done yet? No, so you have a girl Pie and he stand up. Well, no, I've done stand-up. I've been sneaking around just I mean I did Salt Lake City. I went out there in July and did Wise Guys there's nothing really responsibly. It was fun. It was good. It was fun. I mean it felt good to be on stage, but it felt weird. Like I need to be going out every night to feel really good. Yeah. I know. I've been so many months that I just I need to get get some momentum. I need to work out a little bit. So it felt like I was getting my sea legs back, but I had good shows and and the room is just it's just you they're not In the room like the way comedy supposed to be seated, which is everyone bunched together as close to the stage as possible. It's like it's the worst seated the seating for comedy shows now is like a terrible Club, you know, you go to a club they don't know how to say it and they just let people sit wherever they want.


And like I said he opened Mike when he first started that's the way it feels like now everyone has to be spread out. So it's never gonna feel as good as it felt before with a sold-out crowd and no matter how good the laughs are them. Spread out in a big room didn't spread amount to much in Houston. I'm going to be honest with you. Yeah, I don't know what they did in Houston. They said it was 75% capacity. We were there and I'm like that's what they say walk around with a clicker and start counting heads, but it was a lot of folks in there. No, I did one gig like that in St. Louis that I felt like okay. I don't I don't feel good about this. I did it because I wanted to I was Far Enough from everyone to feel good about it, but I felt bad.


That maybe the audience got there and was like we were sold a different. Yeah idea of what this would because we get in there and we're seeing a little bit too close. But Wise Guys insult like they did it really like you so I felt good about being there and didn't feel like anyone was gonna get sick how many feet it was definitely like a third capacity. I mean the guy is just struggling to stay open and I it's so sad, but it didn't feel good. All the loans are drying up. Although the relief is drying up. Are there going to be calm? Any clubs to even go to after all of this a real good question. I'm nervous. It's a real good question. There's going to be a lot less and then then what happens because a lot of bars are going under to so it's not like you're going to be able to replace them with bar shows because who knows how many bars are going on there and who knows how many restaurants are going under New York City.


I think it's something like 4,000 businesses are done is so in Manhattan crazy. Sometimes I think that was the number and I read that on a month and a half ago got to be Or by now 4000. I mean, it's I haven't been there since before covid even though I have an apartment there and I just hear it's just I don't want to be there. Yeah, I have a good buddy money lives are still he's been there the whole time and he says it's fucking war zone. It's terrifying. He said first of all, there's so much violence. There's so much cry you you just can't he has a friend that's a cop as well. And you know, he send me the sheet of all the things that happened that night and it's just nuts like so many shootings in the shootings are off the charts like back to like the 1970s times like when Times Square was a junkie war zone They had it figured out for a couple of years there.


Yeah. Well, I don't know what we were talking about James all torture wrote a piece about New York. City's dead. It's not coming back. It's a sobering read this in the post today or yesterday, but it's a fucking sobering read Because you read it in like it's not hyperbole everything. He's saying makes sense. Yeah, there's no reason for me to go back to I've been considering going Back just because just because you don't want to abandon this city that you like so much and people that are staying there saying like you own apartment. No, thank God ooh, but I sign on for a center for a Leto year lease that started March 1st.


Oh yikes the most expensive apartment. I like truly paying three times the rent that I've ever paid because I was supposed to have a really good year because I was going on a theater tour that you know ended so I'm I'm out. I'm out a lot of money every month. I'm trying to find us. Oddly sweet keep like lowering the rent. I mean, it's just I'm just out of here. That was a thing in all teachers piece. It said that the New York City rental rates have gone down 50% which is crazy. If it's looking for an apartment in January and February Swiss if I would have waited a month, I could have saved so much. So yeah, I've got an empty place there my assistants just living there and it's all my stuff is just sitting there and storage. I don't know what to do. I don't know where to go. What is your assistance there?


Yes nice someone's there, but but It's it's it's supposed to be weird for her too. Because it's an empty City. It's like weird moving around there. Yeah, it is. I don't know. I don't know what you do all day. Yeah, because that's the thing about living in New York is that you have a shitty apart small apartment because you're just out doing stuff all the time. Now, you can't do anything. So we just in a shitty apartment. So you're just it. I mean, my partner is pretty nice. I never got to step foot in it before but fairly its size same building a tell lives in I guess I have I've had you guess you never asked him. Well, no. Well, she just told me I think I saw a tell the other day. So I think he's in there but that cigarettes there was a bunch of podcasts that have done about apocalyptic disasters and downfall of civilizations and like the Mayans and the Egyptians and you know asteroid impact.


We're right on course, but no but I was I was always looking at those going. Wow, that's fascinating that's fascinating, but I never thought in my life. I would see something relatively minor in terms of like the amount of Destruction. It's done but into human life in terms of you know, if it's worse than a flu but it's not like the pandemic of 1918 or any of these other horrific disasters that have that have happened but to see such an effect that it has on our civilization you go. Well, what if there was like an asteroid impact or what if there was a solar flare? How much worse would it be if you could get a lot? Lot worse. Yeah, I think it's I'm so scared.


I've always thought that we were going to live to see the end. Did you really I do think that why people would go what Nikki every generation thinks they're going to live to see the end of it never happens, you know, and I go will someone's gonna be around for it. There will be people here when that when the asteroid hits when the supervolcano erupts when there's aliens land when the aliens land yeah or when they tell us that I've been here a while when they finally reveal that they've been here. Is that what you think? I don't know. What do you think I think so, I think yeah, I think if there was an island that had Champs that were figuring out Dynamite.


We'd keep a close eye on them. Yeah, if there's a bunch of like Advanced chant-like, right right. Now we have primates like lower primates. We have monkeys. We have Champs we have gorillas and then we have humans. There's nothing in between that used to be there. Right? But what if we found in Ireland and it Did have like Australia Pittacus and you know, they had you know, maybe they had Spears or maybe they had some some primitive weapons and you know, we were keeping an eye on them and someone had figured out dynamite and what they would be studying them so closely but they wouldn't stop them in their tracks of dynamite. Like let him walk. Let's see what happens. I think they wouldn't they're just going to watch us destroy ourselves before no, I think nuclear weapons is where they stepped in and if you pay attention To the timeline of ufologists if you when you look at the UFO history of sightings and of like the really big sightings.


Yeah, all of them came post the Manhattan Project. So once they start I think once we started detonating nukes, they're like yo, these monkeys are lit, like what are they doing these fucking crazy assholes? They found a spot in Nevada and they just detonating Bombs all time to see how they work. Why are they just like kind of being seen? Sometimes slipping up we see them and then sometimes they're not like why what's going on their sightings? Why are they messing up? I don't think they are messing up. They want us to know that I don't think they're terribly concerned about us seeing them, but I don't think they visit that often because I don't look at it. Like I was just reading about this scientific research.


It was forced galante had this scientific research where they found this mouse that they thought had been extinct since 1960. Is this weird sort of kangaroo like tiny rodent? It has like kangaroo legs and it bounced around and you know, this this is something that people will go and they'll study but they didn't find it since 1968. So how many people are studying it? Not that many Ryan. So how many aliens there's a little fucker look at them. It's so cute durable is credible and eater. No, I know it's a very and they thought that this caught this guy was gone. Yeah. Yeah. Now he's back. So it says magic creature the size of a rat related to an elephant with the legs of a kangaroo that's been lost to science since 1968.


That's the Somali send G an adorable elephant shrew recently discovered in Boise that word Djibouti Djibouti Djibouti Djibouti researchers from duke lemur Center Association Des booty nature and the Cal Academy found that the Somali senji not only still exist but appears to be doing well with population numbers appearing to be quite high so but my point is like how many people were looking for that thing is like is a small handful of scientists? Okay. Aliens would come here how many? Oh, yeah. You're right. Maybe it's painful. Yeah, not many. Yeah. We're that little mouse. Yeah to look. So alien, I think we're probably more interested in the mouse because obviously we have the ability to manipulate matter pretty cute pretty cute adorable.


I could have watched that thing. Yeah Scamper about all day. We're dangerous. We have the ability to destroy all life on the planet like if Russia shot at us and we shot it them and then trying to jump into fuck it it's over and everybody started pressing the nuke buttons this whole planet would be wiped out of life that we'd be we'd be relegated to bacteria right with it quickly. What does it matter to them? If we destroy ourselves they need us for something. This is the question. Why are we so different from all the other animals on the planet? Why if you talk to evolutionary biologist, there's a clear path between lower hominids and human beings, but it's not a path that you could detail every single step of the way and there's some giant holes.


One of the big holes is the size of the human brain the human brain doubled over a period of 2 million years, which is apparently if you talk to biologists the biggest mystery in the entire fossil record. They have no idea. Why because not only is it a crazy thing that an organ doubles in size over a period of In years, but it's the very organ that came up with the idea of evolution in the first place. It's the it's the organ that thinks is the organ that recognizes Consciousness is the organ that recognizes creativity and allows people to invent things and and you know and Innovation and all of the different things that are responsible for all the crazy the crazy technology that separates human beings from all the other animals all comes from this one thing the human mind and the human brain is the one In that baffled scientists, they have no idea what happened.


There's all these theories about well, maybe it was psychedelic drugs like those Terence McKenna's theory that it was the the consumption of psychedelic mushrooms. And then it's other people's theory that it was what we figured out fire. We started cooking our food. So we would more access to nutrients and then hunting made people more clever. And so the the more clever one survived in the ones that that have the larger brain sizes that mutation was favored. Natural selection favored larger brains and then came another theory is that we're manipulated another theory is that these aliens came here eons ago and they found these primitive primates and they started genetically manipulating them and they created human beings.


Now what makes it interesting to me is that human beings are so different everywhere so different. We're we're like dogs in that all dogs can fuck each other and make baby dogs, right and all people can fuck each other and make baby people but we look so different like Shaquille O'Neal can have sex with a four foot ten Chinese lady and make it baby. Yeah, if you looked at animals a Great Dane can have sex with each awawa if it's possible or a bulldog and make this Like if you looked at a wolf and you looked at a poodle you'd go there's no way that's the same thing, right but it isn't it.


Yes the same thing. So, why are we not but why is it the same thing? It's the same thing as we manipulated them. Oh, yeah. This is the only reason why there are German Shepherd resource that golden retriever other. Yeah, we made them that way. We made them through manipulation. We slowly but surely turned them and we don't even know how so someone breeded us someone. Very possibly could have done something to human beings which changed us from these lower hominids and turned us into a bunch of different versions of what we call human beings, right? That's my theory. No that's not but it's it's an odd thing.


Like, do you know that most hybrids like even bass like there's bass we're like a largemouth bass will breed with a smallmouth bass and then make this hybrid but the hybrids aren't viable they Become a separate species. That's the thing about like donkeys like a donkey. Is it a which one is the is it a mule has sex with a horse and that creates a donkey or is it a horse has sex with a donkey that creates a mule. I think it's a mule has sex with a horse and creates a donkey but donkeys are sterile. They're sterile. Most hybrids are sterile difference in dong. Okay donkeys are difference between the horse same family mules and the other hand are cross between a horse and a donkey.


Okay, that's it. So It's a fuel is a cross between a horse and a donkey but they're not they're sterile. They don't breathe. So why even have a mule because we need it because they're better for riding. Okay, there there there were more durable like in the wild west they like to cross those two and then people would like a lot of the Cowboys in the wild west like even some of the Texas Rangers. They rolled a road mules. Okay. So the donkey and the horse is where they are that way. Out to to ride and to be a better transport, but once which how does it where go back to where which one is it?


Again the horse and the okay horse and a donkey makes a mule. Yeah, so mules are more durable than horses. They require less water. They can last longer mules gets its athletic ability from a horse and its intelligence from a donkey so mules where we're what a lot of these Wild West guys would prefer actually okay mules have smoother muscles than horses. Think of a football players muscle build compared to that of a ballerinas. Both are very strong but a mule has greater physical strength for its size and more endurance a mule gets its athletic ability from his horse and tell just from a donkey. Yeah. Well, let's just get rid of horses and donkeys mules sound like they're the best of both problem is you can only make a mule with a horse and a donkey I'll because of mules can't they can't breathe each other.


But we can which is weird. We can have sex. Yes. Well, yeah, we can have sex with each other. Like, you know, we can have sex with people that don't look anything like and make something that can have sex. Yes. Like if you looked at certain people you would assume that they're like if you looked at yaaow Ming, right right giant tall, dude. Yes, and you looked at a small man from Ecuador you would assume there's no way that's the same species if you were from another planet and you had no idea. What a human is. He brought this is a different thing. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, it's hard different thing. Okay. It's just a different version of that same thing. Yes, but like a liger which is a cross between a tiger and a lion. They don't breed. They can't breed.


They have useless sperm. It's what about Bulldogs and like all those dogs that have really they can breathe they can bring yeah, they get well, they're just fucked they just manipulated them and may their nose fucked up and they come all like asthma and I know he can't breathe. They're always they were terrible trouble. I know fuckers feel so sad for them the terrible thing, but someone made them that way They selected for that, you know, and then also, you know, obviously people their bodies adapted to like people that are really white. Well, the reason why they're white is because people originated in Africa made their way to places where there's no sun. And so their body developed this sort of like a solar panel for vitamin D.


That's why that's why people are so white they're white because it's easier. This is one of the reasons why African Americans have a real issue with vitamin D because if you live in a place like say Seattle or New York City where there's not a lot of sun African-Americans their bodies are designed to protect themselves from the sun which is why they have so much melanin, but it makes it harder to absorb vitamin D particularly wearing all these clothes and it's cold out and it's cloudy. So it's incredibly important for them to supplement with vitamin D when they're in these climates where it's very cloudy now, how do you get your D? So now you take it outside to but I take it I take vitamin D every day like other pill. Yeah, I take 5000.


Yeah, I take a gel cap. It's okay. 5,000 IU's I took it twice a day. It's very inviting these very important with covid but isn't the absorption of D depending on how much iron you like? I just feel like it just goes through you unless you have all the other stuff. You do need the other stuff you well, you need fat like most of these mussel. Most of these vitamins are other their fat soluble. Some of them are water soluble, but they does it digests better with food because that's really normally where you're getting them. Other than D which is what you get from the Sun? Yeah, but dr. Rhonda Patrick, she explained it to me in a really interesting when she said it really is a hormone vitamin D is we call it a vitamin and you could take it as a supplement but it is a hormone and it's responsible for so many different things in the body and particularly for the immune system.


And when you don't have vitamin D in your system, your immune system is very vulnerable. Yeah, so they were saying that there's all these studies that correlated with this they're saying that other people that were in the ICU for covid more than None of them in multiple studies had insufficient levels of vitamin D and only 4% had sufficient levels. Okay is really crazy. And there we go. Yeah vitamin D here D zinc and vitamin C. They are saying are the three most significant vitamins for dealing with are you are you are you scared of getting it given it giving it giving it. Yeah, I'm scared of giving it's like my wife's mom or right or a guest.


I would feel horrible. Yeah, so I'm tested. It so much goddamn it I get tested a lot. Yeah. Yeah every week. I just you know you and I both did it. That's fine. Yeah, but I mean I've had this is my fourth test this week. Whoa. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so did the thing at the comedy store? So I got tested then during the day and then I get tested again. You know, I just I've been tested. I don't know how many times I've been tested since the whole thing start, but I'm fortunate that I can have you know, the concierge MD service that right. What would you do with the comments for the other night? I saw people hanging out. They'll just for the documentary for Showtime. Oh, yeah, it was interesting.


Yeah, really fun. Is it fun to hang out again? It was fine. That was the most fun. I've had stress and Yas like Whitney and Annie Lederman and Bill Burr and in Jay Leno was there and Paul Rodriguez and we were all just laughing Jay. Leno's come now you mrs. Doing I heard him say fuck. Really. Oh, yeah. Let's try no jokes on us, too. Yeah he Happy to be out. We're all happy to be out. Yeah, it looked at it. I thought it was a TBT the pictures from that I was like, oh the old day what that's two nights ago. Yeah. Yeah 290 and that's that. Yeah, they're going to survive right who fucking knows. I don't know how they'll affect is going to survive. Right? Well, I'll factor is struggling already in the Improv struggling already.


I mean, these people are getting there getting loans these businesses and stuff. But I mean how many fucking businesses need loans I think They should have just opened it up and let people come if they wanted to come let people work if they wanted to work wear a mask, you know, check everybody check their temperature when they come in the door when you go to Texas, if you go to a restaurant, they just check your temperature. They check your temperature. You wear a mask when you come in they distance all the tables out and they stay open. Yeah, and they're not making a lot of money. They're not making as much money as they used to they don't have nearly as many tables open, but they stay open. You gotta give businesses the option to work give people the option to work. Give people the option to go out of they want to go out this idea that they're just going to tell us what's best for us, but they're not telling us what's best for us because they're not telling us all the shit that we're just talking about vitamins, right?


There's no talk of that. There is no one knows anything. I'm getting all of this from you right now. There's no where it's all you can just one place go and get everything. You need to know people get pissed at me for repeating these things. But listen, I'm repeating these things because you think they don't know people don't hear it. You're not going to hear it anywhere else if you heard it from me 30 times, I'm sorry. Sorry, it just means you like the podcast you listen. Yeah, that's but the reality is there's not a lot of other sources where you're getting this information. So I try to put it out as much as possible and I try to direct people to folks like Rhonda Patrick who will tell you exactly what the studies are and she sent me something recently. There's another correlation study between vitamin D and covid and how Vitamin D the actual mechanisms and how Vitamin D protects you and it protects your immune system from covid.


Yeah vitamin D. Zinc see but you should All those things he should drink a fuckload of water and vitamins you take why are you taking just like fistfuls every morning? What's your regiment? I take a bunch of different things. I take this as supplement called athletic greens. I take that it's really good for us if that's really easy because you just pour it into a bottle of water and I shake it up and I just drank it. Yeah, you know and they taste good. So that's that's really easy for me that covers basically everything but I always supplement with d and I always supplement with large amounts of see because those are two ends ink because those are sea. Zinc and D are the ones that are directly connected to the immune system for covid but C is like if you have colds like C is one of the best for keeping everything.


That's why things like emergency those things exist. Like sees just a great one for your overall immune system and taking care of yourself when you're sick, so and but I just think like having levels of all those things like fish oil as a giant one. Yeah inflammation fighting the CBD I take that every day to take CBD Every day. Yeah, I have CBD drinks these CBD kill Cliffs. Do you like CBD? I need no, I mean I like smoking weed and I feel like I Get Enough from that. I'm sure you do get a lot. I mean, I just quit smoking weed Watts who wanted to go why because I just am trying to figure out my mental health and get us figure out what the hell is wrong. I mean, that's why I mean that's why I'm sitting here right now is because I was having a very tough time and I tweeted something kind of crazy.


Z that I wanted to shave my head they really do like I just feel like something something needs to change I need to do something wild. I don't know why I'm compelled my hair has been falling out. I think just from stress and I'm just like I'm tired of pulling chunks of hair out. It's just it's distressing to me that you're losing that much hair. I mean I well I've just started only like washing my hair once a week. So when I do wash it it's like so much comes out because been a week of just no strands coming out and you lose a hundred hairs a day. So once a week, I washed my hair and it just feels like I'm Do you know that I was in a fight or something someone you like? I mean it's and I just put I put it on the wall and I just it stresses me out so much.


And so I was like, I'm just going to shave it and I'm not going to but I did just kind of want to put out a tweet that just sometimes when I'm feeling depressed. I just need to let people know or just kind of synthesize my feelings through that way and I don't do it to like make anyone concerned about me but really meant a lot to me that you reached. Out to me and I was completely taken aback by it that you sensed my dilemma. Well, I know you and so there was a something when you were saying also there's no friend. He has what is reach out to make it was so nice and then it turned into this. Yeah. I mean I when I when I tweeted it, I was just like don't put this out there hate when people tweet like cries for help and then it was a funny Cry for Help At least say thank you.


I try to at least be funny with them. It just really irritates me. It's like just to just reach out to your friends. If you need help don't put out a tweet that makes everyone worried about you. So a couple people reach out to me like hey, are you okay, but it was yours that it really touched me because we don't like text regularly, but that was like it was just such a real but like loving text. What do you care about you? I know that really meant a lot to me and I was going through a really fucking bad time last week this time last week was not in a good place. Thankfully I came. Out of it, but I keep getting hit by depression like in a major way. I've been trying to reach out to a lot of friends lately over the last two months like just send I what's up, man.


You good. Really? Nice. Just a nice little just hey, how are you in a lot of hugs? There's so many people that haven't been hugging no one's touching each other anymore tired, you know, so no one can see each other smile when they hang out there wearing masks. I mean, we all feel so disconnected. I'm living with my parents and Steelo. As I my whole social life was comedy like that. I don't I didn't really have friends outside of it don't have saved me is this. Yeah, me too. I like doing podcasts and zooming with people and doing different just FaceTiming. Thank God for it. But it's just the connection with where the fuck would what would we do with no cell phones and no FaceTime.


What the where the fuck would we be with? No Skype. Where would we be? I don't know like that is giant for me FaceTiming just being able to like Like just see people what's up and see their smile? Yes that we do we need it so numb. Yeah, and it's weird to just hang out with my nieces and nephews and their yacht like three and one and that we have to wear a mask around them and you can't they can't even see your smile. You can't touch them that's really bad periods two years for kids. They must be like, why is my aunt not touching me anymore? My I can't hug my when if I even get close to my grandparents, I hear no. No, it's like this is going to be scarring. But the weird thing about it is if everybody's just tested why can't you just back hang out?


Like what what are we worried about like invisible ghost to come in and invade people's bodies and you're not if you don't have it. You don't have it. Yeah, you know site you worried that between the time you got tested in the time you're seeing that person you might have gone to the gas station and touched a nozzle or you might millions that way they don't think you want that way from surfaces. And now we've wasted so many Clorox wipes just like they've kind of abandoned that if you noticed like they don't even talk about hands. Sometimes one has are no no one cares about that anymore. It's just a mask. Yeah, it's just a respiratory issue. Yeah, it's just coming out of your mouth and into someone else's mouth. That's so annoyed. I flew here from St. Louis the other day and just sitting at my gate and it's mandatory to wear a mask on the plane.


Now people before it before they get on that plane. They're just sitting there without their masks on it the gate just like really just trying to stir up shit. Just trying to get away. Way because they everyone around you is wearing a mask. How could you not wear one? You knows what they're doing? Yeah, they just made it they want to prove that. They're not falling for it and they're better than you and they're it's so deliberate and it makes me sick and it's hard because I want to shoot them a dirty look but they can't really see how much I hate them on my face because it's covered by mass. So I really treat squint my eyes just like you've motherfucker. I was so Furious other day just people with the loose mask down by their nose. I had a driver the other day that had His nose exposed tonight is Justin.


Like hey, can you pull it up over your nose? The only way it works like do I really have to you haven't seen that Meme yet. But the guy with his dick at like how is that not gotten to you that that's how you wear a mask? Yeah people just it's I don't know I everyone I'm staying in Marina del Rey, everyone walking outside is wearing a mask, which I think is a little much just like walking down the sidewalk where don't needed when it's sunny out there. Yeah this the disease the virus dies instantly and It's exposed to sunlight. Okay. Why why why don't we know that Joe? I don't know. But Bret Weinstein who's a biologist sent me this paper where they showed that it dies instantly in when it's an all or almost instantly what's in contact with fake sunlight, like ultraviolet light and also also actual sunlight.


So when you're in sunlight like you're if you're outside like your that's why the closing the beach is so fucking stupid like it's sunny like you're Risks on you right in someone's face. You're not going to get it and did they see a spike after the protest? Yeah after all the for sure that was there was a like a person it has to be but that was exactly outside. What did they stop as soon as it turns dark out? No, that's true. Of course not. All right, they were wrong with you were saying that to me. I'm like, what the fuck are you talking about is everybody Cinderella? Oh my God. I'm going to be doing about some kid. We we can just protest and gather outside. This one is window aren't but Even then people are screaming right?


Yes - circumscribing that's just like spewing droplets everywhere. If you don't have a mask on and you're screaming and other people are screaming and then there's people yelling at each other. So they're in each other's faces this like very little chance. You're not going to get some spread if you get what you know, I figured it was a bench pyramid said it was like having a music festival in every city for three weeks in a row. I mean really was it's like you constantly had protests. Yeah. So if you That many people it looked it's not a coincidence that it's spiked right afterwards, but nobody wants to say it because nobody wants to be insensitive and no one talked about. I remember the protest going on what we were all about. We'll see you in three weeks and then I don't remember hearing about the spike that happened for sure Spike.


That's when everything got shut down in La everything has shut down. This is the hospital's got Phil again. There's the cases Rose the kid'll it has to be either it's contagious or it's not okay if it's contagious and you get a bunch of people together. They're going to give it to you. Each other right? There's no way around it. It's not saying that it's not a good cause and that it wasn't important to protest. Yeah, all those things are true. But understand that that's what happened. Yeah. I don't think you should stop people from protesting but I also don't think you should stop people from working. I don't think you should stop people from going to the gym. You should give people the opportunity to do whatever they want to do. That's what America is supposed to be about ain't the problem is the hospital's the ICU beds and all that stuff respirators, but then even use respirators anymore, the one of the things they're fine with respirators.


The vast majority of the people that put on respirators died. Yeah, because when you're at that point, no not necessarily according to Michael Yost doctor. He told him if I put you on a respirator you're going to die because your body's going to stop working because because you need to unease for you, right? Yeah, and then those signing off the respirator it's hard for your body to breathe. Yeah, so they thought you needed respirators right now is a big thing right then now they've adjusted that position. They don't they don't think it's a good idea to put People on respirators anymore. Unless they're a Greeley bad like they're about to die, right? Yeah. It's that's life support. Yes. Exactly. It's so now the use more like CPAP machines which are just the give me some sleep.


Apnea. Yes. Yeah. So instead of breathing for you just introduces more oxygen into your system. Okay see that and you know, there's so many things that we thought at the beginning that our mask thing. It's like I don't care if you're sitting at my gate and you don't believe in Mass you think we're Also crazy and we're all just Sheep wearing masks. Just everyone around you is doing it just do it. If it just to be polite even if you don't believe because like I was saying like walking today outside and seeing people with masks on I was kind of like I think this is kind of stupid but I felt like out of respect for them. I'm gonna wear a mask, even though I don't think I really need to be wearing it. I'm gonna do it. So that's all I ask people to do is just if someone around you if I go over to someone's house and they They want me to take my shoes off, but I don't really believe in doing that.


I'm still gonna do it because they do it. Yeah, just to be nice. Yes, and I mean and I just think the peer pressure have you I've early when this was happening. I was like getting invited to like social distance barbecues and things like that when they were like just trying it out and going over to these things and be under the understanding that we're all going to say, six feet apart and wear masks and you get there and people are hugging and people are closed and you just kind of feel peer pressure. Into doing it. Well people go back to the normal patterns normal patterns is in especially when people are drinking. Yeah drinking. Yeah, but we know what's fucked up is like the Trump rally when he had that big rally when he had in this Stadium on was wearing a mask and then Herman Cain died.


I know and they were like, well, it could have been many of his place he was or know. It's like examined that one place with 10,000 people on one place. Yeah. Yeah, but I mean, even I go into these parties. He's being like I'm gonna keep my distance. I'm only going if it's done right and then I get there and you feel so stupid being the only one who has a mask on or and you feel it's hard to stand up for yourself. Sometimes. I'm like fine spit in my mouth. I guess we used to do that was there was these tests where you could do it instantaneously and then you know, you can just have my comedy club. Yes, you just have people take a test as they're walking through the door aren't those coming out soon the White House has mmm really?


Yeah. Look at one minute past. Yeah. Once the White House and they test them you have it in a couple of minutes. All right. Well that'll solve a lot of issues. That would be everything if you just had like a giant, you know, a line where everybody spread out by six feet. You test them all on the line, you know you write your name down or or you have to register maybe the shows at 8:00 you have to show up at seven and get tested and then you can be there at 8:00 look at be inconvenient, but it's way better than having no show and then you could go there. No one could have a mask. You have a regular. Club and have the place packed it's possible. I can't believe I took that for granted so much.


Well, I just thought we just always thought it would be you be able to do that. You can think I thought anything else could happen to my career. I'll always have stand up to fall back on what everybody thought that not everybody like how many people didn't have a podcast how many people didn't have any if I didn't have a podcast I would be first of all I'd be bouncing off the walls. I wouldn't know what the fuck to do and then I would be a Point where I was thinking like hey, I got to make a living. Yeah, like what do I need to do to make it maybe I need to get a regular job. Like how many Comics are getting jobs a lot of them. You can't get a job in show business because in our filling anything. Hmm, so just told you do Teatro dust, I'd go to know I can't even teach martial arts because Jim's arklow, right?


So like what would I teach and if you teach you how to do it over Zoom now to be good. Nobody wants it. Oh my God, if you want to get paid to teach a resume. Good luck. Nobody wants to pay for that. Yeah. Well, I mean, I'm thank ya. Thank God for podcasting. Thank God, you know, I'm trying to write a goddamn book here in the book know we have you written a book. Well, I got a deal to write a book one and the editors were so annoying. I gave them their money back. Yeah, just like hey, do you have these Pages yet? Hey, we like just a basin on some stuff that I wrote on my blog that was, you know, sometimes funny just but District thoughts that I had.


Yeah, and but then once I started turning in stuff, they're like we want to transcribe your stand up because Jerry Seinfeld did that and and and fucking who else did it George Carlin and I'm like look George Carlin did because he needed money. All right right broke taxes, and I don't know why Seinfeld did it they probably just paid him and he said, okay, but I'm like, I'm not doing that like if I'm right if I want to write a book, you know, right? It's supposed to be consumed in book form stand up as opposed to be consumed on stage. That's different things. It really helped me though reading those stand-up kind of transcribed stand-up books when I first started stand up to like read jokes and like learn the craft of writing a joke and routers and of words, like I turned to those books where like people would just take stand up and write it down.


But yeah beyond that I from a comedian, I think that it's well, it's easy way to repeat that. Like when I first started doing stand-up one of the things that I used to do is I would do other people's bits for Friends, like I do a kinnison bit of a Richard Pryor bit for one of my friends and like that sort of got me into like the rhythm of stand up and then I read that Hunter has Thompson when he was learning how to write he would literally write down the Great Gatsby line for line. So he would sit there and and re-type The Great Gatsby just so he can get an idea of the rhythm of the pro bono. Yeah. Yeah. I've been doing that recently with stand up like I'd I've stepped Away from watching stand-up, but I've been watching it again.


Just because I need to remember how to do it and why I love it and and and so much I think of who I became as a stand-up started out just like trying to copy. Sure. Yes trying to figure out how do you do this and watching it so much and ending up sounding like a mixture of all the people that I love so much. Yeah, that's always weird. Right the beginning. You're always like a copy of the people you admire. Yeah. I mean I still Get some of the things I do and I'm like, oh that you picked up from Silverman. Yeah. Yeah, you picked that up from gas again. Yeah Hedberg. I mean, you're just a mixture of everyone that you love and then eventually you gain some autonomy and you figure out stuff that works for you and who is truly you but even my own personality before I did stand-up his old based upon me ripping off the popular girls the way they talked in the way they acted.


Of course, there was one girl that had like kind of a lazy eye in my in my high school who like was really hot and like all the guys liked and I started like kind of like having I would just do it. I would just try to like have like a slightly like it would just happen because I was like trying to get any way to for people to like me. There's another girl talk like a baby and I would just like start talking like this is like no people liked her cause she was hot not because her voice was like a baby. So I just I Really if if I listen to someone too much as starts, I start sounding like them and and and copying them. It's a real problem. That's why sometimes I can't watch some of the stand-ups I love because I just start sounding like them but I can't help it.


I just did a girl out of kind of a lazy eye and she was really hot and I had like a fetish for lazy eyes. Wow, okay over. There we go. I guess one slightly lazy eye and I just thought it was really hot after work because she was a freak. So like I just Associated lazy eyes freak like what? Really horny. Oh, yeah. This is really sexual like all the time just one time I wanted to do we wanted to get stuff. Yeah. She was just I'm really horny. That's so funny. Yeah, and I was 21 and she or down she was older than me too. So is that was interesting how much older couple years like, she's 25 and I was 21 when you were young. What was the oldest she went.


Did you ever think I did a girl was 35 when I was like 23. Okay in a couple days. Yeah. But it's usually like you just getting used by some chick once get Gorilla fucked. It's usually some woman who's tired of like dating guys who work in an office, right? She goes and find some see I have young guys coming after me and I feel like they're using me so that they can just like somehow have a story about like fucking an older woman and I don't want to be that like, that's interesting. I don't want to know you just think they're attracted to you because you're confident intelligent. Agent because I think it's some weird fetish they have or they like they are they had a speech therapist that they like got boners for and I remind them of her.


I like there's what would a ghost I think that your sexy? Well, why wouldn't you just assume I don't know because I just don't look at myself. That way I cannot there are certain times where I do feel really sexy and I and I can feel that way, but generally when someone's into me I go what's going on here. What do you want? Because it can't be that you want to have sex with me even though I know I'm an attractive girl and like I work on being attracted. It's not like I'm I don't think I'm a dog but suspicious Jam suspicious and you wanna know why because I sometimes I'm fucking right and specially since I've gotten a little bit more famous. It's that happens and I and because it as I've gotten a little slightly more famous I had my self-esteem has risen a bit in terms of just I like myself and I'm like, oh maybe this guy does like me for or me and then it happens that they just want an autograph from you or they want honestly someone wrote me that today and a guy that has been interested in me and asking me out a ton and he just wrote me today like hey, I heard you're going to be on Rogan if there's any chance you could get an autograph from him.


That would be so cool. Thank you. So and I just roll back know like just know with nothing else and it sounds so good. No, and you don't even bother putting up here. I didn't say no. I'm sorry. No, I don't feel comfortable doing that. No. No, but it is that that's happened before so you worried that they look at you as being someone who's got a high profile and made of the connect themselves to you. It can help their life in some ways to fuck other girls in their Social Circle because they said they fucked a girl that was on Celebrity Game Night playing badminton with Bob Saget. I mean, that's How I feel is that and I'm not wrong like this does happen.


There was another instance where a guy got a picked a guy. I thought liked me and I do think he likes me, but he got a picture with me and I guess we both weren't wearing masks in the picture. I guess we're too close to each other and he couldn't post the picture because he felt like it would be bad luck for me. We're not wearing masks but we were like for me I was like, we're far enough apart, but do what you want and and he's and I go okay. He's like oh so I'm not gonna post it. I was like, okay that's totally fine. And then he's like, but I'm Really like to see you again. Like I really liked hanging out with you. I'd love to take you out sometime. And I was like Hey, I just don't think I'm gonna point my life where I want to be dating right now and he goes well, can we just meet up to get a picture? Oh, so it happens.


So it happens when it happens. Can we meet up just to get a picture? So now so let everybody know. I know you yeah or and then I've been does what I see is him getting that picture and then going back to like show the girls that he really wants to bang their his age at some party. And he's like I got a picture with Nikki Glaser and I like we don't know who she is. What is she like? Oh, she's like 36 and then they all make fun of me. And that's like that's the oh no. Oh, no, what's the special wasn't even funny and I was like, that's I just see them all making fun of me and like how pathetic that I am that I've like fucked a younger kid. I guess I shouldn't say the word kiss our legs. I think it's like 25, which is not that's not that bad.


He can for a guy that's standard. But there are you going to love that I'm talking about. Really want to change the subject but it's not so that's the worst part to talk about these people than they then they're so excited. I'm gonna get a text as soon as I'm out of here. Hey, I'm gonna be like, no there was some animosity between us I see where I really did want to spend time with you. I think you're really going to take a picture with you just because I think you're awesome. That's one of the document the fact that I know you there was this guy on a plane a couple weeks ago and I met him at my gate and usually when I fly I just like put on my headphones. Bones and like sleep mask and I just try to stay. I don't want anyone talking about mask and sleep mask.


Oh my God and face shield. I've been wearing the shield to Shield. Don't don't. Yeah. I want to make a statement that like, I hate all of you not wearing a mask. And now I have to EE protect myself and look what you've made me do I want to send that message. I love wearing the shield At first. I felt stupid now, I feel cool. And if anyone's gonna judge me, you can't recognize me came to see me in there. So it's great. So usually I'm but when I fly even pre covid I would just always kind of I just didn't want anyone talking to me. I've been caught in conversations on planes with people and it just brutal. It's brutal and I learned the hard way but likes years and years ago. I don't know just don't stop and you can never close your eyes.


You can never relax this Q catch your eyes and they still talk it or that you put your sleep mess down there talking you have to lift it back up and you just have to eventually say I just don't want to talk but this one guy sat next to me at my gate and I feel bad because he heard me talk about him on Whitney's podcast and he felt really bad. Well this happened but whatever but it just this this I want to just tell you that it happened. I was sitting at my gate I was a hot guy sat down next to me and I took off my head. So I made like my head accessible like I kept my mask on but I took out my headphones to be like you want to talk to me definitely could and I just I said there was like some I don't know if there was a gate announcement that was kind of funny and I just like muttered something to myself.


Making fun of the woman talking trying to get this guy to like laugh or to spark up a conversation and he was just like hey, I'm a big fan. I was like really I was like, oh my gosh, thanks. I was like, what? Do you know me from like, what do you he's like, I love your show and I'm like what show and he's like your podcast sounds like oh this guy knows me because my podcast it's like I do it every day. It's really like it's like reading my diary. I don't even like my friends to listen to it. It's just too much. It's like, oh this guy like accepts me for me. I and he likes it. He's like tall hot. I can't see. Half of his face, but I'd like can he's cute. He looks good what you see looks good. Yeah, and I never ever meet guys like out in public. I've never been someone that like has chatted up a guy at my gate or like on the plane.


It just never happens to me. And so I'm like yes start chatting up and it's like going really well and and I'm flying Southwest. So there's no like boarding order and or know, there is I'm like the first to board but there's no there's no seat. Simon so he says to me save me a seat next to you. Let's let's continue this conversation on the plane. So I'm getting on the plane. I'm like, listen, I want to sleep. I need to sleep and I was going to but I gotta I gotta find a husband and this might be the what like I got it. I got to put myself out there. I've been so closed off for so many years. So I get on that plane and we were chatting. We're having like a really good time. He's like funny and nice and interesting similar interests and you know, he lives on the west coast for them like I can move anywhere like I'm down let's do this and um and it's flirty but it's not like there's nothing over the top but I was just like I kept thinking I didn't see a ring on his finger.


There's no mention of a girlfriend. And then finally I'm like, we need to switch this to like a flirty kind of we need to talk about dating or something to get us in that kind of vein of conversation. And I said something like so have you been dating during covid and this is two and a half hours into the flight and he's like, oh, well, I have a I have a girlfriend. No, I live with and I was just I almost started crying because not because I was like, oh I've described I thought I was gonna be with him. But because I just could have been sleeping that entire time and I wasted this is I don't want to know I'm ready one. There's no other way to know like you could have mentioned her but women intended why if he just thought that you thought that he was a fan and he wanted to talk to you, but I don't want to talk to a fan.


For that lock why maybe this is an interesting person, you know Lord, I don't know that you were tired. No, it wasn't his fault. It wasn't his fault. It was my fault to get my hopes up, but that's too far into a conversation to not trust the you got it. You're talking to a girl who you know is single you sound like a guy age-appropriate. Do you sound like a guy do yeah. I'm talking to her for fuckin two hours. That's and then finally she says I have a boyfriend you ever so much. What the fuck? I bought you three drinks already. Yeah. Yeah, I'm not guy don't waste my time. Don't waste my money. If you have a girl it's just it's I was really ticked off but he's a fan though.


You are a public person you are a professional comment was going on but Nicky you have fans you sell out all over the country alive during real comedian had been many months since I've been on stage. I've been living with my parents for four months. I Out who I was and I was so I was so excited. I was so sad and I continue the conversation because then I go you know, what Nikki. What can't you just get to know someone and for relationships fail? He's as a girlfriend sound like he's married. Like I'm sorry kids are going to grow up. They're going to get out of the house this week. Whatever - Wait years. Yeah. No big deal a plant that seed its kind of girlfriend.


I don't dig a hole. I'm not gonna like what I see at least flirt with a guy or like try to break up a relationship. I mean, I would never do that. But if a guy has a girlfriend, I'll still like have a flirty conversation because most things don't just most things don't like most well, everything doesn't last. Well. Yeah, that's true Everything your life, but it's a guy's married then I'm like, okay. Well, I'm so glad no hopeless story about a couple that dated when they were in high school and then they got married. They married other people broke up the whole deal went through lives and then got married again. When they were in their late 70s, that is sweet.


I like that. Yeah, it is kind of adorable. They decide like what we've been fucking around all this time. Yeah, what we've been doing. I know I feel like a you know, I've been I've been circling the same guy for a really long time how long I've only had a shark. Yeah. Well like a cat. Got like a like. Well that is extinct Mouse scampering about people haven't seen me since the 60s click. I just it's not. Yeah. It's like I've only really had one actual relationship and we have just we've got we got back together back and forth for like five or six years broke up and got back together broke up and got back together and then we haven't been together for over like three years now, but we slept together for a while even after We haven't slept together for like a year and some change and any in oddly enough.


He just moved back to st. Louis. So we both met in your study buddy, just and he's living with his parents to oh perfect as we're both looking to what we're going to do next. Yeah, you think it's perfect but he won't have sex with me what I know because I think he liked is gay cares about me and like doesn't want to write upset me because I tend to have sex with someone and then I get That's My Hope. It's up a little bit. I mean I got my hopes up on a plane with a getting the conversation with the guy. I was like planning our future together. What were you thinking? What was like the ultimate goal like you see in the babies? You're seeing the whole thing. Now, it's just like he was talking about his family and I was like picturing meeting them and he mentioned like moving to San Diego and I was like kind of annoyed because I'm like, we haven't even talked about San Diego yet like some things that I'm like, well you don't even know that I want to go there but I would but he that's weird that he would just say that so yeah.


And I really do I as soon as I start talking to a guy I start picturing her future. I think surely we were walking down the aisle to him. Yeah, get ahead of myself. Well, they probably opposite. Okay. What's your opposite is like never thinking you're ever going to be in a relationship and every guy you talked to never imagining that it's ever going to go anywhere. Yeah. Yeah. No, at least I have some hope. Yeah, you're hopeful I do have hope yeah, you're hopeful this guy this guy cares about you. So he won't hook up with you because he doesn't want to get your hopes up. Yeah, it's really nice because there is every time we hung it hang out together. I'm always like can we please just have sex like I haven't had sex in 17 months now, it's so long, Joe won't just hook you up.


No. Well, we I know terrible and and and I'm really I mean I could get laid. It's not a pro like they're guys that would gladly fuck me, but I just don't I don't feel comfortable having random sex. I'm not good at it. I need to really like someone and he just knows how to get it done and we've done it so many times. It just feels like it would be so easy. Yeah. Well, I don't but he's right I probably would think. Oh my God, we're going to be something we're going to get back together and then my heart would get broken again. So it might not be worth it. But it does he do he is a he works in radio. He's right. He's on he was a producer behind the scenes producer. We met on a show that I had on MTV and then we created - oh together, I'm coming Central and then and then that show got canceled and then we got canceled and then he now he's on the radio and st.


Louis. He's like a broadcaster now and yeah, so he's a good guy. He is a good guy thinking about it that way. Yeah, because most guys if a girl's like what can we please have sex? Like that's it. Just sex he could yeah, that's it. Yeah, and I've said that before so many times like that's all I've that's all I want. I don't want anything more than that. So not true though. You get to learn men have to learn that that's not really true. I mean I simply had a couple times ever in my life. But I was younger and stupid where a girl said. I just want sex but then after you give it to them, they generally that's not really the case. No, it's I think women develop like intimacy bonds with men and different way like like we were talking earlier about not that I think I know right or it's General generalizing, but we're talking about using like men do not Not care, if you use them, it means zero like if a woman is like I just want to use you for sex guys like okay.


Yeah, it doesn't it's not there's no negative connotation. Like if you are walking by a girl and her friends and she use you for sex and she tells her friends. Yeah, I fucked that guy just for the sex and the guys there you go. Like he's like I feel bad but if a girl walks by and a guys hanging out with his friends, I was like, yeah, I just use her for sex. She's going to be like Cersei terrible the guy wouldn't feel bad at all. Unless he's really weird. Obviously. We're generalizing again. Sure. Most men are not going to have an issue with the I don't know. I just got kind of horned up when you said when you when I picture cracking a guy and someone said I just used her for a sex that kind of was exciting.


I'm excited about that because he doesn't want anything. I'm scared of intimacy in a big way. So I do like the idea of just being used and like, oh, someone just doesn't want to get to know me promise. If you get rocked, right and it's fun and you enjoy it and you actually have a good time like you got assumed to if you're having sex with someone you don't hate them. Yeah, like them another person problem. You have to like someone have sex with them and have sex with them. You just then now you like them and you add site and then here's the other problem. If you like them more than they like you then you get upset like a lot of times people when they get rejected by someone they feel pain they feel pain of either be rejected or neglected and then the associate that pain with Negative that the person is done, even if they haven't really done anything negative and then they get angry at that person and you look I didn't do anything.


That's what annoys you disappointed me for sex in like, ah, yep. No we had sex. It's not even like I would feel like I was getting used but I would just be so disappointed like why don't you want more with me? Why would you want to marry? Why don't you want to spend time with me all the time? Why don't you want to be my man? And and that's from but what he does do that makes me feel great as like I He always says I want to make it clear. I want to fuck you so bad. You looks like he'll tell me all the things that I need to hear that essentially just kind of get you Juiced up. Yeah, the like it makes me feel as good as if I got dick down. Okay, so he says all things I want to but the problem is you look so good.


This is what I do to you. This is what I want to do smash it. Yes, and then I'll leave feeling like, okay like still got good that's good. So it is good, but the guy he is a good guy and Hey, it's that asshole on the fucking plane. No, that guy was so good to you that poor guy wrote me cuz we exchanged numbers. I guess Ed plant that seed his relationship might fall faster. Now that you've talked about on two different podcast know he's gonna be sick Bob is that you I know okay need to talk to his girlfriend is listening. I just want to say he did nothing inappropriate. He never flirted me if there was nothing he did that if he were my boyfriend, I'd be like, he shouldn't have done that. So the DDP he behaved like a true gentleman did not flirt with me.


I Read into it way to way too much but I mean William do I don't know what I'm gonna do. I'm Riya I'm on rye is a celebrity's right. I like a blue checkmark and it's not because I like guys that are famous because they're famous and I want to be famous. It has nothing to do. Maybe there's like a little bit to do with that. I'm not gonna say it has nothing to do with that. Yeah. There's something hot about a guy being extremely successful. In other people thinking that he's cool. Okay. Yes, I'll give you that. I think it's because I get I can I can know them before I go into the date. I can watch their stuff. I feel like I've already acquainted with them.


That's why I like a blue checkmark it validate it and I can get to know you before I go on a date. I don't like going into these things blind. So that's that's why I like a blue check but there's no one in st. Louis that's on the goddamn map. No one. No, not one person. Really honestly. No, there's no one in st. Louis on them. Where are they all New York and La yeah, or like the Stockholm. I mean, it's all over the globe there its Global and so I'm connecting with some guys on that and when I come to and then I just always get so busy when I come here, I don't want to go on a first date with someone. I just want to hang out with my friends. I haven't seen in forever. I've been I've been into this book lately. It's called irresistible. It's about addictions downloaded that because I saw you recommend it and oh my gosh heavy, right?


Yeah. I'm really scared. One of the things I was thinking about when I was going through. It is dating apps like that's kind of the same addictive. They have to be like how many people are having these Random Encounters because of dating apps. Yeah. How many people are it's like swiping left at which one's good. Right? Right is good right means you like them? Yeah. So do you go to the right? You swipe them? Right so you go right you go right there, right? Yeah. Yeah swipe left to right. Yes you go from. Yeah. They're in the middle and then you swipe them right or you swipe. Them last and yeah means you like them left means no, you're fucking bitch.


I never want to see you again. And right means let's do it. And sometimes you go too fast on the left because sometimes you're just like, oh, what is this apps? Think of me? Fuck up and you always should have went right on that go use your back. I feel like rose on the Titanic and Jack just fell into the abyss. Like I really feel like my husband's like like like And you can't go back. You can't you can shake the app very gently shake it. Yeah, you just like go like because at first I was going like it works because people told me just shaking him come back it wouldn't work. But that I realize you have to like do one solid you have to be like in control of yourself and then then I'll come back and then you see them wearing a tank top and you swipe and left again.


You're like, oh my god, dude disgusting tank tops are gross. No, I mean there's always find something about a guy that I can be like I can't deal with that. He'll like to say is dog as his best friend or my mom thinks I'm a catch or some part of his personality is based on a food. He loves just anything kind of the points like that or like I love to get lost in a good book or just something I love I want to cut I want to cook for you whenever guy writes that I'm just like your poor I get I mean like you Beautiful restaurant, I don't want to watch you cook. Let's just go sit down and I don't want to watch you have to like just because you got you know, one of those meal kit delivery services.


I have to sit and watch you chopped cilantro and talk about your connection with your nephew. I'm never gonna remember because we're never gonna see each other again take me to a restaurant. I know some of these guys are just trying their best. I try just like get so angry at these apps gets mad because you were guys like, yeah that I get mad at guys to cook. I eventually cook for me but like just shut up. I don't care. I don't really don't know and I don't cook. It's not like I'm gonna take care of that. So I guess I would like a guy who cooks but I drank more like a guy who just like, I don't know what I want. I'm hoping this isn't fair to anyone. I don't know what I want.


I want a guy who I already know. Oh my God, and I can hang around with and then develop a crush on and then I decide when we're going to take it to the next level. You just want to be the boss kind of I want to be the one to be like, okay now we can even though I tend to like it when guys make the first move and kind of our the fuck you I'm all over the place. I got I got a guy who texting over here. So am I nothing can come out? It's not disrespectful laughter. No, it's I know it's sad. I got a guy right now who he's like a he's a I would say we're talking to an a-lister here.


Yeah, one of my first not my first but he's definitely he's definitely up there. I've known about him for years been a fan and we connected and he just wants to say sex with me and like have FaceTime sex and stuff like that. Like that's what without physical sex while he lives in Los Angeles and I live in st. Louis. Oh whenever I'm available or in his area. He doesn't seem to want to meet up. So oh it's just always he checks on him in on me every couple weeks and it's just like have you been intimate with this person? No. Oh Madam here one time in person and then it went right to texting. That's that's weird.


Someone who that's weird. I know. I don't like it either. I'm like can we hang out in person? And then maybe I can virtually jerk you off or whatever you want me to do walk you through whatever it is you're doing to yourself, but I made I just made the mistake of getting him off one time when he was text. Like he always texts me at like 3 a.m. And it's just like, how are you feeling like just checking in on my well-being and the middle of the night and it's not it's nice. I really do think he's like cares about me but like there's some kind of weird and we both haven't to the see issues. We've declared that to each other. So something's going on there and we can't even see each other.


I mean I live in st. Louis with my parents and he's in here and you're here right now. I know I didn't let him know I was here but I just had I didn't tell him find out he hasn't talked about them on this podcast of millions people hear about no, no. No, he'll know he'll now good. You'll know nothing. Are you friends? Nikki, yeah, she's on the podcast talking about no, I don't think he tells him I doubt he's told anyone that were friends or text Ali told one guy, maybe one guy. Yeah, let him know let your friend know that I'm talking about him, but he befriends I do I like he's he's well we did this one thing the other night because he texts me and then he wants to like have sex and I'm just it takes me a little bit of time to get like really horny for someone she definitely jump into it.


It right I would just like to maybe just talk on the phone get to know each other go out like a regular person, right? I would like that to date I went on my I wouldn't both pre covid. He was in New York and I was like, let's meet up and he's like are you flirting with me? And I was like, oh this been going on a while, I guess. Yeah, if it's five six months. Yeah. Yeah Jesus. It's just off this often on its every couple of months this guy like remembers that I exist. It's like he doesn't like me. There's no future here. He wants my Special and he was like, I think before my special he didn't think much of anything and then you watch my special night talked so much about sex. He like thinks that I'm super super sexual even though I haven't had sex in like so long.


I don't even know what your sexual but also sensitive. That's what's going on. It's not that you're not sexual sensitive. You don't want to get hurt and you're also smart and you're you know, you've lived on this planet long enough to know what fucks you up and what doesn't so you're careful. Yes. Not that you're not sexual. Okay. I like that. You're pretty sexual. Really? Yeah. Well, I would say you're very sexual. Oh good. I thought I haven't felt that way and I haven't hooked up in so long. I don't you don't get morning. Yeah, but you're not you're not around someone. Yes. Oh, yes. I was around someone. Yeah like in comfortable with that if I had someone to have sex with I'd be like your old lazy-eyed lady from back in the day.


Have you? Be getting I would be yet. Yeah, I can I can get addicted to sex pretty quick when I'm in a relationship and look like having it. It's just an easy way to tap out and forget your feelings. So I've also part of the book about irresistible. It's it even talks about sex addiction put its gambling addiction really get into that book because I got distracted by my phone again Teresa. I mean, I'm reading it on my phone as I'm learning that I'm addicted to my phone. Yeah. That's what I was a part of it was I mean, that's what ever I feel like so many guys are ex-addicts a lot that I deal with and like have relationships with or like in communicating with I'm just like oh this guy's a sex addict and and and a lot of them are famous.


I think that creates I mean you can have sex with anyone you want when you're famous gets really really hot chicks really hot chicks. They throw themselves at you and you become their Max had your look the woman. You're the one who's being pursued. All right. Yes, and so the that's the problem with famous guys is they're constantly they're too busy. He was like really really hot chicks constantly being thrown at them. They don't really need to have a relationship where the I mean. That's the appeal of having a relationship for a lot of guys I think is just having a regular person to have sex with that's definitely one of it and then there's also this this book is talking about porn addicts and gambling addicts and then it's really all the same thing.


It's like your body and your brain gets fixated on particular activities and those particular activities. Occupy your mind so much and that it becomes a detriment to your life and it is with video games it with sexism porn. It's gambling it's with drugs and that they used to think that they're different things these think there's an obviously drugs have like physical consequences like heroin and you know, an alcoholic alcohol is one of the worst to get off of because we get off of alcoholic people who are legitimate alcoholics. They can die of cold Amy Winehouse. That's how she died. No. Email oh, no, that's no one talks about it.


Let's Google that look it up because her documentary she was puking her brains out at the end and that can cause cardiac arrest like that. And so I think I mean it could have been a mixture of both but I do think her bulimia had a huge I listen to the fucking her shit so often she's my like regular playlist. She's in so much pain. You can hear it in her voice. It was such a beautiful voice. It's interesting. Invoice, you know what you think about going to rehab? You know, hey, I was killed by bulimia. Not drug says her brother. Yeah, drink and drugs took their toll but eating disorder fatally weakened Amy. Yeah it is. How does in serious shit?


What is the what is the the corners result though? Do they say the thing is a brother? Yeah. No, I just think that that gets swept under the table so much eating disorders when really that is And you know covid is killing a lot of people with eating disorders to people that on the other side of that food addicts who can't stop eating and obesity makes you so much more susceptible to covet I mean I yeah, I think I'd only know that because I've you know dabbled and all of those things before and it's terrible. Yeah. I'm a definite addict and I gotta watch it but the sex addict thing I mean, I just think that that's one that's unchecked for so many people.


Yeah and So acceptable and porn addiction. I mean, I can't get off without watching porn. You can't get off at all. But a launching Point not even close. I wouldn't even try if my internet was down. We had a power outage the other day at my house and it was just like, okay. Well, that's I would be screwed without but I couldn't do it. I mean, I would figure out a way I think I would manage but if my if my toys aren't working and aren't plugged in and if I don't have corn I'm just not getting off. I've never been someone who can do it manually and and with my As a nation, it's really a problem because the porn I watch is like not good. What kind Joe Joe Joe Joe Mickey Mickey Mickey dude, it's bad.


Let me step. Well tough. No, that's team. You kidding rape. Mmm. Yeah, really? I mean, I got a threat on like a DM from just some fucking troll a while back. That was like if I put out a hit on The dark web for you to be gang-raped and asked paid the guys $100,000 to do it. I can make that happen and you know, someone would accept that and I was like joke's on you the that's my fantasy. I don't really mean that please do not do that. But I was also like no that's I'm not joking like that tends to be the stuff that I watch is like really aggressive gangbangs and like women tied up III pay for my porn because I feel so bad.


What's The women in it. I hope that they are being compensated for it. So I pay like 30 bucks a month for kink.com. I'm watching really fucked-up stuff and I've always been to it been into like being tied up in like I'm someone who doesn't feel like I deserve pleasure without like having pain like I don't ever celebrate anything. I can only celebrate her like relax if I put in so much work that I'm just like dead so I can is really hard for me to like enjoy myself. If in life, I always have to have it so I have to punish myself first and so orgasms are not something that like, I feel I feel it's hard for me to give myself one and let myself have that much.


It's like it's too much. It's like Christmas. You're like used to wait a year for Christmas. You can't give yourself Christmas every day. So I feel I like to be tied up in like forced to have Christmas and like I is Christ. That's what I that's what I tend to like is like you have to do this and because I'm so so I don't like losing control. Either and the orgasm is like the most you can lose control. I just feel like I don't like being that out of control and I don't know what's going to happen. I'm scared. I'm just gonna like shit everywhere something like I'm totally scared of shitting everywhere is no one else scared of that know, they come I don't think I've never shit everywhere when I was saying something that you regret or like just do it.


I don't know having a Kramer moment when I'm skating. No, just I'm terrified of what might happen. That's why I only have sex with people that I like trust so much so that if I sit on them, they wouldn't I know that that guy would hate me right and like wouldn't tell people and that's why you're willing to let them tie you up you trust him so much because if they tie me up and I shit, okay. Okay. Sure. Yeah. It wasn't my fault. You tied me up no choice. Oh my god. Um, yeah, so if you're forced then you have you of yeah you It's not your fault what you did or what you said? So do you ever watch Regular porn or is it always like no time never it's always I started King Kai go to kake.com I go to anal.


I go to bondage I go to gangbangs. My problem is I do not like the women to be abused. I don't but you can't find gangbangs where the woman's being treated nicely. You can't find one where they're just like good job. You're so much like I've talked about this in my special, but I thought after talking about it my special and saying can I please get a A respectful gangbang porn with listen and heed my request and maker been gangbang when they're just like they're proud of her for her, you know tenacity and her strength during this really arduous Journey personal journey, and they're never nice to her. There was calling her a dumb bitch. They're making her oink like a pig they have a fucking boot on her head.


They spit in her face and I honestly Joe I'm not kidding you I watched porn with half the screen covered up because I don't like what they do to her head, but I like what they're doing. Into the rest of her because I just it's too there's so mean, you know choking her like doing a fishhook. I don't like any of that but I like I like the idea of gangbangs. I like the idea of a girl being like kind of used and taken advantage of and I do feel guilty about all this because I'm a feminist obviously, I love women and I want us to feel empowered and I'm so sad for these women, but that's what gets me off like, I'm gonna cut under them. Yeah. I don't want to be Joe. But that's all this gets me off is watching women get fisted.


I like that now when I don't have any interest in me having that done to me, why do you like so I say why? Oh my God. Oh my God. I don't know what I'm even saying. But yeah, dude, I'm walking from cry watching like it just it just is a slippery slope dude it Just gets, you know it you go from just like slight bond is where girls tied up and a guys maybe like doing some stuff to her with a wand and like fingering her and choking her a little bit and then it's just like seven guys writing pig on a girl's head and making her oink and like and and spitting on are you bookmark those?


I have a file. I have a I have a An email that I sent to myself it's called porn. I like and I just keep sending myself the next anytime I come from a video. I send it to myself so I can go back and I can also see my my descendants into depravity over the years I can see where I started and where I'm at and how it happened. How was this is 2017 is when I started it so I have a good backlog of what what I like about this is that usually the girl is I don't like to see a girl in distress. I don't like As soon as she I think that she's not having a good time. I get out of it because a lot of these girls are having a good time. They like to be pushed to the Limit one of my favorite porn actresses and I just want to give her a shout out because she does brilliant work is Kristin Scott and one of her the best videos is called School of Seduction.


I think that's what it's called and or no. Fuck. What is it called? It's there's like the sack adamant Academy that these girls go to where they learn to be sluts. And they have to like graduate and there's like five days where they go to the school and they're tied up and they're just like fucked by a bunch of people and their Maids it like Plank and get fucked at the same time as their planking and it's just like there's they get they just they have to do what you say when someone tells you you have to do something you have to be like, I guess I have to do it. It's not my fault that I'm a whore and they I just like that that's what I'm into because I think I have so much guilt associated with wanting to be sexual or wanting to feel Sexual that if someone's making me do it then suddenly it's not my fault.


So if you think that's why you like bondage and gang Banks is out of the person's control. Yeah, and I was looking into early because I was feeling guilty about having like I don't have rape fantasies. I don't have that but a lot of women do so many women do and it's actually called. It's not a rape fantasy because you're not fantasizing about actually being raped because that's not consensual you want consensual not it's called CNC consensual non-consent. That's what it's called, and I'm kind of Into that. It's an interesting phrase consensual non-consent. I know it's kind of murky but saying rape fantasy is just not right. I don't want to be written by someone. You don't want to have sex with you want to be raped by someone you really attracted to but you want to give into it.


So you want it to happen. So it's it's sort of kind of rape but not really right because you actually want it to happen you wanted to mimic you want it to be like role-playing grape. But you could stop at any time because you have a safe word and you have all these things but yet so it's it is it rape so women that go I have a rape fantasy and think that's like quirky about themselves. You don't you really don't you don't want that? No one wants that and so in the yeah, that's what it's called is consensual non-consent is what so many women are into and I read about it on Reddit because I'm in the subreddit sex and it's just a very common thing that that women want in bed with women like to be choked. They like to be bossed around they like their hair pulled they like you No, but the only like it to be done by people they want it to be done.


But yes, yes. That's what makes it very clear. Yeah. Yeah, although there's some times that I and there's some times that you know in some of these porns where the guy is like, I'm not attracted to him and I wouldn't want his dick inside me, but I definitely like when they they treat you like a car they're working on and they just like use tools on you and there's no dicks involved that appeals to me. That's a very popular one. Like if there was a place you go like a body shop. Yes, get worked on. Yep. I would love it. There's a place you can go where guys would just massage your vagina and use tools on you and you'd be totally down with that.


Yeah, as long as there's no cameras and no one would ever talk about that. I was there. I mean I'd be talking about it. I'm here the next week, but what if it was up to me you wear a mask and and yeah, that's good. I could wear masks. Okay. Yeah. And just lay there and have them eat you out. No, I don't want them to mouth. You know, what the mouth maybe I don't know maybe after go there a couple of times you get bored with dildos. I don't I'm no doubles are so good. They're like dildos and toys are like amazing. I like a wand and I don't even think I could have regular sex without also vibrator to yeah.


I want I want penetration and I want some I'll still wow, just one time. It's just I don't but what's up - time you've taken without any masturbation or so months and months Melvin Gordon months months without masturbating like it does not but when I get hooked on it, like it's the same way. I abstain from pot like right now is gone 12 days. But if I sparked one up right now, I'd be doing it all the time until I say I go cold turkey and I just quit so I can I want a really long time without it during The quarantine and then I haven't hooked up with I haven't had sex since for you know, a year and a half at this point and and and I've hooked up a couple times in that in that time with guys but I've always stopped it before I've even had like banana even close.


I just knew I wasn't going to come so I was just like just let's stop when you were talking about like gangbangs and stuff your hands. You had like a death grip on your knuckles and you like Bring your hands back and forth. You're going over in your head. I'm like Jesus. Oh my God. I know I get really intense about it. Yeah, you were very intense about yeah sure. It's it's because I well I feel really bad even admitting that that's what I'm into why you shouldn't feel bad. That's what you're into. So it's you're not a bad person. You're a good person. Thanks. You're into weird shit, but that's okay. I'm not the only one. Oh, there's a website. Yeah kink.com Is not supported by Nikki Glaser alone.


No, they Arjun. It's like there was a charts like it's all nice and we thought we had subscribers this one ladies. She's out of her fucking mind. He's a whole industry based on this one broad. They kind of make more too because I am running out of videos to watch because it's hard for me to go back and watch old ones. So I've been going back and going because they've been around forever and I went back like, you know 68 pages and there's stuff from like pre 9/11. I'm like I can't watch this woman from And take on single guys later because I just picture her neck. Where is her life taker? That's the problem. Right? So you think about what happened to them that allow them to be that person the gangbang with pig written on their face?


Yeah. That's the problem. That's the problem and that's why a lot of videos on kink.com have a pre-interview in a post interview. So you see the girl go. I'm really looking forward to this gangbang today. I've wanted to do this for so long. It's been a goal of mine. I'm really into this. I don't like This you know, you see them consent to all of it and then happens and then they have the post one where they're like shivering in a towel with like wiping pig off there for us. And I like that was fun and you see them and there's always a post interview to you know, prove they survived woo. Ruff do you get criticized for talking about the stuff like by other women?


Hmm. I will after this for sure but no generally not because I think I'm not alone are with this one. You think why do you think you will with this one? Because you just you got really deep into it. Um, just because you have a bigger audience more people are going to hear it. That's why when I think it was never alone and I think there's probably a lot of women that are listening to this right now that Yes, yeah. Yeah same I just tend to with my addictions I tend to go from they get they get bad quickly like they so they start off. So yeah, these are all Progressive things like eventually you'll get there with porn if you watch it long enough it might take someone else thousands of years to get where I got in a shorter amount of time but it all is leading to I mean it gets gross.


That's why these things exist like you don't start off liking I like a woman with a boot on her head. Like that's not something that like you goat. You just slide their event. Well, that's the thing about porn in general. If you go back and watch old porn old porn was just people on dates because if you go back and watch like porn, you know, like from the 80s, it's basically two people are hanging out and the ones like I'm just so tense. I've got such a headache the guy's like, hey, let me rub your neck and Of in the neck and look how it feels so good it feels so I'm so hot. I need to take my shirt off and they take their shirt off and then I start making out and brauch.


Well, yeah, I mean that basically nothing for me now. Yeah, but that's what it is. I know it's basically just people having sex normal people in normal situations and then there's something about where people need to escalate the everything has to like, okay. I've seen that now I need to see more and that's what It's to the fact that it's that it's an addiction. Yeah, you know, I've never been into anything other than just sex. That's so good. Luckily. Yeah, the only point that I've ever watched just girls with big asses too sexy girl. Yeah, I'd say yeah II that's normal sex fetishes you guys.


I've never never been into any of that. No choking. Nothing it gets so weird job it is weird. There's so But I'm not even joking in real life either. I've never never been into that. Anyway. Yeah, I don't know why guys are into it. I don't relate to I don't know that I'd want a guy to like want to do that to me dangerous. Yeah. Yeah, but because it was you escalate so think about the escalation in porn. Well, what if a guy is into choking girls and then he gets bored with just regular show now, so don't want to use a rope like I promise I'm not gonna hurt you just can use a rope now. I want to what if it just like a Wire yeah, like I'm not going to make a little Mark on you.


Ok. What if I blindfold what if I hit you like and then things get weird what if I'm a murderer? Yeah, and then it leads I mean that I was watching that Golden State killer documentary and that's what that guy did he started just doing break-ins and then that wasn't really itching it the scratch anymore scratching the itch anymore then he moved on to rapes and that was doing good for a while and then slowly he started murdering like it didn't just start out murder. You saw his progression. It's like it. Yeah, this stuff's can. Really scary. I mean I like being I think being choked is nice because I mean you're talking about what David Blaine yesterday like, it feels good to like lose Consciousness and like come out of it and be pushed to that brink of like there's something euphoric about it.


Yeah. I think there's the what do you for thing about getting choked out is like as the brain like rushes back to Consciousness is probably a bunch of hormones and things that are just floating around in there. They get fired up and also like there's this like dopamine and and all sorts of spikes. That's the other thing they were talking about in this book irresistible talking about the dopamine Rush that people get from various addictions and they were talking about Parkinson's drugs that this is really interesting because Parkinson medication apparently what it does is it spikes dopamine and it also it has a lot of really weird side effects, like people get addicted to gambling they get it perfect to give away all their stuff.


There was a there's Drug called re-equip and GlaxoSmithKline wound up paying this guy somewhere in the equivalent of like $600,000 because he was a straight heterosexual man with no problems with gambling and he had Parkinson's and he got on this re-equipped drug and he became a gay sex and gambling addict and he started having risky gay sex like really risky like he would contact people on Craigslist and meet now. Yeah, and he was just gambling. All his money away but so much so that he won in court suing them because this even go to the store. It's re-equip and the man I believe he's from Ireland and he won in court.


It was like he wasn't a game and it's a straight man. Oh, right. I mean, I never thought about it before, you know, and then he became a gay sex and gambling addict Adam in my act for a Right. I had this story in my act for a while like because apparently he would like like snap out of it like in the middle of doing stuff. Oh, yeah, Parkinson's patient wins lawsuit over gay sex addiction a French man who owes French don't trust friends. Look his name Didier. That's too close to diddly-dee Dee your jean bar 52 of Nantes France sued, the pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline 2011 claiming the drug.


We re-equip caused him to lose eighty two thousand Euros gambling on the internet instead. He also became addicted to gay sex and risky sexual encounters. He said he was raped after starting the drug in 2003 and attempted suicide and time lord. It's a great day John Barr who is accompanied by his wife during the emotional ruling told the French eight, press agency. It's been a seven-year battle with our limited means for recognition of the fact that GlaxoSmithKline lied to us and shattered our Was Parkinson's disease destroys neurons deep within the brain the releases the feel-good neurotransmitter dopamine re-equip belongs to a class of drugs called dopamine antagonists are agonists that relieve Parkinson's symptoms such as shaking stiffness slowly slowness and trouble balancing by activating dopamine receptors, but the drug has drugs have side effects that while rare can be serious.


Yeah, but it's a weird things like even if you have the urge to do it you are not In control of your own actions when you guys go out requip finally give me some just gives her mission to Curtis and stuff that I've always wanted to do have an excuse why re-equip. I wonder if it works on people who don't have Parkinsons. Like what does it do to people who don't have Parkinsons? I mean that's terrifying and you will you will I would always hear that in the side effects of drugs. Like if you are have are suddenly gambling out of nowhere near like what is that? This is a drug for weird. And if I'm going to start gambling out of nowhere, come on Snap, but it's totally see it's scary these drugs.


I mean that I'm trying to get on a new antidepressant because I'm just been so just I'm tired of having these low lows that just don't aren't necessary and are just scary sometimes because the things I think and the things I just have these thoughts that come in they can't stop and I just can't work. I can't be funny when I'm depressed. So I got to get back on something but I'm so scared of all these weird side. X in the things that it might make me do rightly so and so I mean how long have you been on antidepressants? I mean I was on them for years and years ever since I was like I got anorexic when I was like 18 and then I was so depressed from that because it just like starts eating your brain that I got on stuff and then ever since then I've been I've struggled with depression.


I think even before then I was a really depressed kid. I look at pictures and I'm just like staring despondently into a corner like on holidays. I'm like, oh it was just a prank. Just and so now I'm looking into maybe having ADHD because it's often misdiagnosed in women because women don't really have the hyperactivity part of it and it just makes us kind of depressed and have low self-esteem and messy and all the things that I am worried though about like messing with your brain chemistry with these drugs that look maybe they don't have the right stuff that they're giving you and it might be causing other problems are exacerbating the current ones. Us know because I've been off them for a while now and how long you been awesome for a couple months.


So you're not on anything and I've been gone through years of not being on stuffed animals exercising. Yeah every day. What do you do I run four miles a day. Okay. So yeah and a lot of exercise. Yeah, I do I try to exercise a lot and still fucking and I eat healthy. Yeah, man, I just get all of a sudden. I just get these fucking thoughts that come in and then I'm depressed for like 4 days. So badly that I just I'm I could file. Disability as a comedian because I cannot be funny. Okay, my brain doesn't work. You can file for disability should be able to yeah because I can't do the thing that I mean, I feel disabled. I feel like that's when I start thinking okay. I got to find a new job. I can't do this. I can't be broadcasting every day of nothing interesting to say and I said that's not true at all.


Why everything you said today has been very in. Thank you. Well, I'm not in a bad place today. I'm actually out of it. I don't know. It just comes on ever like word. He's out of the month. Wake up. He felt like I'm going to wake. Oh today know I've been in a good place in Saturday. I woke up on Saturday and I snapped out of it. But you know when I send out that tweak the tweet that led to me even being here was because I was just suffering for like four or five days with like really bad depression where you know, I called Gary gulman. Do you know what he went through? Yeah, he's been through like serious serious. Yes. I was I had a text wrapped it and Neal Brennan. I wanted to talk to other guys that like have I had to have had to go places and they were actually did ketamine therapy now.


Yeah told me it was wild. He said he went to a doctor they you know, they put you in a chair like a regular doctor's chair and they induce you into a psychedelic State he goes and I mean I was tripping balls I go really he goes. Yeah what to the doctor's office and they give you fucking ketamine and you trip balls and I'm like did it help you? Because yeah because yeah, they had developed. Ketamine, apparently it has a big effect on people that are depressed and some people are taking it, you know, like a spray like a Mist out of its nasal spray. Yeah, like a body Splash looking Whitney has something like that. Oh, yeah. I mean, it's just I don't think it's a body spot right in front of you and walk through and remember feels your mouth.


Okay ketamine missed like a very low dose of ketamine. Yeah grow dose of ketamine. Why would I'm gonna talk to About it too, but it's so funny because when I when I'm in it, I'm so in it and then when I'm out of it, I just forget that it can get that bad. And I don't even think about it. I forget that it can get so bad but there's no triggers that are making it bad or good right now, like things are really not like are very uncertain. My career is going great by all, you know, if you would Yeah by all indications. I should not be depressed like yeah, but have a loving family. I have my health, but you say your career is going great, but everyone's career. I hit a wall. Yeah, all of us that are Comics we hit a wall in Mark.


The only one is touring regularly is Bert. I know he's depressed right now. He's fucking told you told me just didn't 19 shows or 15 chosen nine days because I'm fucking exhausted. I gotta stop and he goes in his agencies trying to push him to organize a summer tour or a fault or now, and I realize I related I think that Bert is a lot like me that if he does stop and stops working. Yeah, it will be so much worse than it was he'll freak out and you know, he loves to drink too. Yeah, you know the Hebert's got a lot of different things that he's sort of kind of whatever is going on in his head that he's trying to squash. He does it with a lot of different things but he works a lot or he just mean he tours and we towards you towards Bert with her in a bus and hit a different place every night and then it used to be that you would invite people to go.


I know them. Yeah, maybe he has this expectation to fulfill as the party animal and so he is Always, I mean I feel for him always having to be on and be that guy and be shirtless and be down to party. Well, he was doing a special they were handing him shots and he's like, I can't do shots. I'm doing my specialty. Hello book. You drink. He's like you're ruining my special. Oh my God. I'm filming a special here. This is for fucking Netflix you idiots. Yeah, what are you doing? He was mad, but if he's but there's part of me that goes maybe he should be fucked up if he's done all of the preparation for this fuck. Been fucked up, right why the night you take your special would you do things differently?


Yeah, I don't do anything differently when I take specials. Do you get depressed? No, you never felt that. I mean maybe like very low level depressed. Yeah, that's great. Yeah Collective work out like a terrorist. I know and what is that about? I think I'm very primitive. I think my brain like what my genetics I think I come from a long line of savages. And I think the only way I feel good really feel good is to do very violent things. Yeah. Yes. What's your self? I need to I run Hills. I beat the fuck out of a heavy bag. I stroked a little bell around middle of your actually loving fucking love pushing yourself of it.


How much do you love it when you're done, I mean That's the best feeling as I enjoy it while I'm doing it, but I get to a place where I don't enjoy it. Yeah, that's I have to hit that place. You have to push yourself. Yeah. I don't I don't work out to like we're feels pretty good. Like there's none of that. I want to see you like walking them all someday, like doing a gentle Mall Facebook popular with tiny little weight ham walk with my dog. We do Hills. Yeah, put like a weight vest on. I have a thing called an atlas trainer. It's a backpack that I put Olympic weights on the back of it. Like has a like a you know, like you have a plate a barbell.


Yeah, so like the dumbbell plates go over it and then I screw in this collar and I have like a limpet plate on my back. And so I do I'll hike with those on with the dog and a do you take do you take days off? Well, yeah, you have to recover. Yeah, I don't need that hard to do. No. No, I don't think I'm addicted to exercise. No you seem to have a healthy, but I'm care lifestyle with everything I can get addicted to every okay you can oh, yeah. I heard it real real problem with video games in the past eight hours a day like me even more how interesting an irresistible is it that people who make those video games don't even let themselves play that yeah.


How about the World of Warcraft story about the one kid is a football player who lost his front basically his life fell apart fell out of school everything just it can happen is Right. So you used to be that way. We fucking set up a local area network in the back and we have all these computers back. Yeah, the we set up and I have stopped playing them because we would be in here and I would be playing five six hours a day after podcast. Right and there was like four months and I'm like I've stopped and I had to get out of here. I'd be sweaty. My adrenaline be also done recently. You don't with was like a year and a half ago. Yeah buddy to maybe two years ago. What about drinking for you? What about druggin? No, no, never Never compulsive.


Yeah. Yeah drinking. The problem of drinking is it always has a negative physical effect? Yes, so that I'm not into things that that fuck with my body. So when I do something negative, then it fucks with my real addiction, which is the exercise addiction. So if I have if I have an addiction at all physical activities exercise addiction, but it's not an addiction like I have to do if I don't do it I freaked out it's like if I don't do it, I don't feel good. Yes, like I like to be calm. I like to feel good. I like To be friendly. I'd like to feel like even hmm, I don't feel even if I don't work out if I don't work out for four or five days. I just feel like real tense and like short trigger like short fuse but something that sets you off wouldn't like your wife consents it your kids can sense it if you haven't worked out in like what's going on?


What's something that don't let myself get to that? Oh, that's good. Yeah, I don't let myself get that. But if I you stop yourself do meditation here. Yeah, definitely do a lot of meditation meditation. Float tank sauna, I do a lot of breathing exercises in the sauna. I do a lot of that but I just know me I know me and I don't like me when I don't work out. I don't like that guy. Yeah, I don't like me if I don't meditate and I don't let myself get away with what's wrong. I also since the time I've been us a young boy. I've been doing Savage things. So from like my whole life. I've been in martial arts. So my body is just like what are we hitting today? Come on, what? Choking come on, we gotta go and if I don't do that, my body's like any day now we're going we're going to war like shit is about to happen.


It's going down. So your body starts getting in. It's like a battery like you're storing up all this energy. And if you don't if you don't release it, it's like it's overflowing. It's coming off the top and so I exercise just to maintain homeostasis to maintain balance to maintain like just just just to be just have clarity. T yeah, so that you're just the best version of yourself, if you're pushing your sundered percent, I am the best fighter the nicest person I can be when I when I exercise a lot now what if you go through a time where you don't get a lot of exercise and you just can't fit it was kind of this exercise. I don't know fit into my schedule. What does that you figure you figure out a way you think about that is the schedule like there's no like dude what I forget to eat.


Yeah, you don't forget to sleep. I don't forget to sleep. So why the fuck would I forget to exercise its just and I don't think I've ever gone more than Week in my life without exercising. Yeah, I mean doing something I have to unless I've been injured unless I've like a bad injury like have surgery or something like that. Well, that's and up addiction. I think I definitely have a stand-up addiction and I think that I really it really I feel like if I have any depression at all, it's this low level low from not doing stand-up for all these months. It's all low, and then I realized it when I did I did The Improv in Houston. Yeah. Yeah, and it was like, oh my God, we're back.


And I said like fuck it dude. Um, I went with Brian Moses and Tony Hinchcliffe and we're like, dude. Let's fucking just keep doing this is keep traveled around the country any place that wants to have us and then I started thinking I got really high and I started thinking what if I gave it to somebody what if I got it right it to somebody and I can't do that. That was the thing that I feared what I feared the most is giving it to somebody. Yeah, let's give it to like some guests that gets really sick. I know that's that's the fair. Yeah because I outdoor shows Some people that are getting it it fucks them up for months. I know people don't ever recover people still haven't recovered that got it back in March. They have still a fatigue. They can't get up. And yeah, they're hair's falling out there. I mean these side effects they could last who knows forever.


It's really scary. It's a weird fucking disease. It's a weird disease. It doesn't really make sense because it's not like any other disease like everybody who gets the flu you just like it's real similar. It's not like one person gets the flu. Ooh, and it's nothing where another person gets the flu and they can't smell anything for right? Like people are they're losing their sense of smell. I know they lose their sense of taste like but for months like Michael, yo got it real bad where he was hospitalized and he is he's still suffering for fatigue from fatigue, like two months later. He would get tired walking up a flight of stairs. So you get like lung scarring all kinds of weird shit happens. Yeah. Okay, so you're not scared of getting it no.


What about all that shit? You're just scared of giving that to someone. Yeah, you just feel like your body's gonna be. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I'll be okay. Do you get the flow? Yeah, but barely. Yeah, if I do so much though, I doing alright IV vitamin drips all the time and I'm on all these vitamins and constantly working out. I mean I can get sick, but I don't get sick much and when I get sick, it's like it's goes by pretty quick. Yeah, me too. But if it's not but it's um, I'm keeping my body healthy. Elk meat and all this healthy food and it's like your body if your body is in tune and your body's healthy immune system is strong. That's the whole point of having a strong immune system.


It's supposed to be able to fight things off and I haven't gotten like a real cold in years because I take care of myself and I do a good job, but if I was working on a television show, and I was not getting good sleep or I was traveling a lot and I was not getting good sleep. And that's when it can hit you and that's what hit Michael. Yo. Yeah, it was just over. Yeah working. I mean Michael Yo, was he what he flew to New York it was doing morning and didn't know sleep right food New York morning radio television shows two shows a night at Gotham to shows the next night the same thing morning radio TV shows hustle and doing everything. He can flies home. No sleep right then drive to Vegas with his family kids in the car screaming yelling mama, and then he hangs out with his wife's family in Vegas and flies back the Day, so to and front which is 4 hours there for hours back then auditions the next day and auditions there after that.


So it's practicing for auditions getting ready stressed out. Then it hits them. Boom hits him hard. Oh, yeah that mean that used to be the way I live my life to go. He gave it his mom his mom kicked today. Oh really Wanda. Yeah. So because she wasn't sick. She wasn't worn out. So her immune system did its job. What about you and sleep? Whatwhat's your sleep. You're good at my sleep. Yeah. I never had to take anything know. What do you do? What's your kind of routine to wind down that out? Do you keep the phone on your bed and like yeah, I mean occasionally I'll have the phone by the bed. I'll look at it right before I go to bed, but I just conk out. Are you monitoring your screen time after reading this? Yes. Well, I was monitoring my screen time already.


Could you get sucked into Instagram? I mean, what's your app that you just get? No YouTube. I like watching videos. Yeah, it's distracting. Yeah, this is I just get bored and that what you do when you work out. Out what you too? Yeah, like when you're like on a treadmill or something. What are you doing? Are you just like in the moment trying maybe I'll why is it bites? Okay, if I'm watching something I watch fights or listen to a book and I work out but most of oh, yeah. I was wondering like the picturing you reading a book like do you just like sit in a chair and like flip through a book? Like how does Joe Rogan read a book most of the reading I do is audiobooks. Okay. So the most of his knee not reading. Yeah. Well that's reading is like scientific articles or We'd like you can't get an audio books.


Yeah, but I do most of the most of the information that I get from books is either driving or in a sauna. I like listening in this I put are pods on you can use are pods in the sauna. Even at a hundred eighty degrees Jesus. They don't conk out so I do not even there 30 minutes. Okay, I used to but that's another thing. It's like a keep escalating that you said that 20 minutes. Now. I moved it. Like I don't be a pussy make it 25 minutes and then it's like 30 and I'm not satisfied 30s. That has to be 31. So you understand my porn thing. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. I just don't have the porn thing that right. My porn is like if I watch porn it's normal. It's people that are horny. They fuck. That's that's the or yeah, or it's like we probably shouldn't be doing this, you know, exact kind of pouring right know stuff like that, but nothing nothing crazy.


Okay? Yeah, but I get it like I get all of it like the video game thing. I get more than anything because I've had like real that's nice to hear that even recently you've struggled with that. Because you seem to be someone who doesn't have to deal with but it's all because I'm calculated about it. That's all it is. It's like an alcoholic. Yeah. Sorry to affect your well-being. I went cold turkey. He's out you quit it. You can't quit and then we played again when we had the guys who make Doom we had them come in here and we played for a day and even that day. I was like I got out of here. I'll shaky. I was like, I can't do that again. I don't do that again as in he do you do you feel like you're white-knuckling it you'll be like God damn it.


I'm missing out but you have Amazing discipline. Well, the video games are so addictive because there's so immersive and the one we're playing is Quake Champions. So you put these headphones on like if Jamie was playing with me if he was over here, I could hear him over here. I'm walking and the video the graphics are so incredible and it's a three-dimensional game, right you're running down these hallways and people shooting rockets at you and you're jumping up off these things and you're running through the water and people chasing you is that it's fun. It's exciting. That's as good as going on a hike. No why? Because first of all because you're you could do it all day now D vitamin D vitamin C. You're doing it all day, right? Yeah, it doesn't hours and hours and hours and you get exhausted afterwards and it becomes a compulsion like you leave here.


You're driving you think about Holly should have shot me then. Yeah, they got him and that time I fucked up I shouldn't have gone into the lava ocean. Well, you have all these crazy thoughts in your head about the game and it's like I they're really fun. That's the problems. They're really good. But for me, at least they waste too much time and I get to sucked in and then it becomes unhealthy, right because it becomes a like you can only exercise so much, you know, especially like the way I'm doing it. I tell us how much that is because you definitely hit just over half a day. Yeah. That's it. That's it. No more than that. These people that are at the gym for four hours at a time. I'm sorry. That's an addiction. Maybe the point your unless you're training for something.


How are you doing? It was you can't hit the bag for four hours. Right, I guess people are kind of like, you know, seeing about I'm doing like I do around like so I'll set the timer for three minutes is like a time. I was like ding ding naming it goes off and it lets you know every 30 seconds. So I have this ringside timer and it says an interval timer. So every 30 seconds it gives you being it gives you a rating Curves gym, right so sort of so in 30 seconds, you know, you're sprinting for 30 seconds and then you're you're you're doing it at a slower pace for the next 30 seconds then sprinting again. Is a red light there's a red light and then there's a yellow light and it's a red light is when it's time to stop the yellow light is when you common then in blue light is go so that's these three lights right go mean Sprint yellow means Coast red means stop and so it's like this very regimented, you know exactly when you're done.


So when I'm doing like especially like rounds on the bag, you can only do it so much because your body breaks down because during those the blue time is just chaos. It's 30 seconds of just a salt but you can't keep that up. It's just too crazy. It's just laughs and then when it's over and then the the next 30 seconds, it's calmer. It's like you just sort of like getting your heart rate down and just going through the techniques and moving and then the blue light comes on again thing and it's like so you can't you can only do it for so long, right? Yeah, but when it's over I'm like, ah chirp chirp chirp birds and love and everybody's my friend. Yeah. I feel good that way out.


After a hard workout to I mean, I know you need it you get the endorphin rush, but you also you beat the demons down. Mmm. That's the thing is all the aggression just goes out of me like all the the pent-up stress and I just think that my body's condition to do this. It's been doing it for so long that if I don't do it it just like goes when is it coming? When's it coming? Yeah, when's the war? When's the chaos? When's it coming? You need to do you cry ever. Cry for happy things. Yeah, most of the time I cry when I'm happy for people but I cry if I think about you know, I people that I miss and you know stuff like that. That's good. I definitely cry.


Yeah. Well Ike I cry a lot for like things that make me happy. That's that's really yeah, that's cute. Yeah, I craft for people across when I'm happy for people. But yeah, I cry. I feel that don't know. I'm not scared of emotions. Yeah, you know, I understand is yeah, um Scared of weakness. I don't like weakness but I don't think crying is weakness. I think week to not want to cry. Yeah, it's not it's week two not want to embrace the full spectrum of life, you know life is filled with beautiful things and amazing things and it's also filled with horrible things. Like they're all there and to deny that I think is to deny reality it is and that is to be delusional.


I'm afraid of being delusional more than afraid of crying. I think it's really important. That that you just said that you cry and you think it's important. I think so many people that listen to you. Do not so many men. Don't cry Joe, you know that they do I think they don't want you to know. Well, maybe they don't but I just don't think they'll allow themselves to and I'm I put myself in that category like it's really hard for me to cry. Like I have to have to be talking to someone about my back. I have to have it kind of mirrored back to me my emotions so that I don't have license to cry but it's not something that that comes naturally to people but I think it's important to do which I cried on the park as is real recently. Really? Yeah, there was a guy who on Josh Dubin from the he's a lawyer and they were talking about the Innocence Project.


He works with the Innocence Project and they got this poor man, who is an immigrant I believe is from Guatemala who was unjustly accused of murder and they got him out and you know, they were just going through the whole story. But all the prosecutors are trying to keep him in jail, even though he knew his innocent they they finally got him released and it Talking about this thing and I just start crying. Yeah as poor guys thinking about this guy who like makes his way to America to try to do better for himself and it winds up getting caught up in this this fake murder his accusation. And yeah. Yeah, I cried about the I yeah, I just I think men need to cry more and and I love another one of your folders.


Yes, man crying then I'm seriously turned on by men crying. I love it. Can I really put that out there? I The one time my ex-boyfriend cried in front of me. Yeah, I was blowing him while he was like Silk like I'm like, I feel what his tears really hitting me on the head. I'm not joking you it was I felt so inappropriate doing it, but I was like, this is so hot that you were opening up and you are emoting and that I don't have to deal with these feelings on an another way, which is you being mad at me. Are you like bottling up your anger? I mean these feelings have to come out somewhere just was so erotic to me to see a guy like So sensitive, I think it's very weak of people to be afraid of feelings.


Yes. There's nothing wrong with feelings, but they're really going to kill you. There's something wrong with being a bitch though. This is a different. This is what's important is something wrong with being weak is something wrong with like shirking your responsibilities or not doing the things that you know, you're supposed to do because you want to cry and while away all your day and feel sorry for yourself. Like II do not support. But feeling sorry for themselves because everything there's a perspective there's a particular with men. There's a perspective you can change your perspective you can you can just take action and do things. There's nothing wrong with feeling sad. There's nothing wrong with feeling emotional but there is something wrong with feeling sorry for yourself.


And there's a lot of men and feel sorry for yourself for no fucking reason really but nothing feeling. Sorry for yourself is important why because We that's that allows you to feel those feelings to say. You know, what I had I had a shitty child on earth a shitty mom and I got a I got a fucked-up deal. I was that guy from Guatemala that came here like he should feel sorry for himself. His life. Got some no, he should feel sorry for himself. I definitely think he should feel the pain of what happened to him. I mean, there's no way he can't and I definitely think that you know, he should feel happy that he's been Least and at these wonderful people work really hard to get them out.


And then I also think you should feel some anger that these motherfuckers wanted to keep him in jail and they knew he was innocent. I mean, I think there's nothing wrong with all those things but to be to just be paralyzed by that and not do anything and then uses his excuse to never live your life. Fuck that that's right difference and that is a choice and that is also something that you get you learn as a man. There's people that can there's people that you can count on and there's people that are going to fall apart. And there's a difference there's there's moments in your life where you can be dwarfed by that moment or you can rise to the occasion. Okay, and who you are forever is dependent upon how you react to those moments and you could just decide care everything is too hard and you just be a bitch or you can go.


Yeah, this is hard, but I'm going to do it. Anyway, I'm going to get through this and then you learn. Oh I could do it. Oh, I could move forward and the people that learn that they need to How other people that they learn that and then other people can learn it as well. It's a reaction to pain a reaction to bad feelings. But to take action to be a person who actually recognizes that these feelings are normal, but you still have to keep going you still have to move on with your life. That's the difference because it makes sense. There's too many people that just use whatever happens in their life as an excuse for why there are 15 Failure or uses an excuse for why you know other people do well.


Well, I can't because this happened when I was young just right just fucking get up and go just go. I think you can do that after you acknowledge. Like you can let yourself feel sorry for yourself a little bit. Don't sit in that too long. But but if you always because I think I'm just speaking more to myself because I've had to actually seek out therapists who teach me how to feel sorry for myself because so much of me as like, what are you complaining? About look at your life. Shut. Come on. You don't have anything to cry about don't feel sorry for yourself. Don't do that. And then I never get to feel sad. I never sir. Don't you that they go my God, that sounds really hard and I go well, it's people have it worse. It's fine. No, let's go back.


You were scared. Then you didn't get the support you need in that's really that's not fair. That sucks at that happened to you you feel that will you feel that you needed a more support back then when you didn't get it and you were scared and you didn't know any different cuz Were a little girl they take me back there and they go feel feel sorry for her feel sad for that girl and I have to go back and kind of let myself feel sorry for myself. Is there a relief and doing that? Yeah, I think it allows me to stop pushing all my feelings down and being like I gotta be brave. I can't complain because what are you crying about? You you have a roof over your head. You have parents who love you. Once they do that. Is there a build up afterwards like a build back up or they're like, okay now that you've acknowledged the fact that Validated or you have valid feelings and there's a reason why you felt fucked over as a reason why you felt abandoned now that you've like let's look on the positive aspects of Nikki Glaser.


Let's look at life. Let's look at let's have some perspective to they do that. We haven't gotten there yet because we haven't heard all the trauma. That's the worry. The My worry is that there's Merchants that there's there's there's something very valuable in selling pity. There's being very valuable in dwelling on these moments of your life that have been bad and I think there's something in what you're saying that is valid before you are dealing with this where you're saying look at your life. Like you've got it better than a lot of people. What are you complaining about? Like not that you should look at it that way but that there are positive and negative ways to look at things the thing about having bad child having a bad childhood and having bad childhood experiences.


Is that it makes you a more interesting and resilient pricing and that is undeniable and that I think is something that it's very difficult for people to come to grips with what they look at their childhood. They look at bad aspects of their life. They want to dwell on I'm like, okay get that out of your system. Then I want you to look at it this way that is given you a depth that most people don't possess. Yeah, and that's why you're interesting. I know everyone that I know. Was interesting is that some fucked-up childhood in his own parents. It's weird because I want to protect my children from adversity. But yet all of my favorite people the problem from adverse fucked up.


I know I'm coming from that's gotta feel cut because you want to make the best you want your kids to be funny. You want them? Yeah, that's usually the case. It's like whenever I see someone who's just like sometimes you meet someone who's like stunning, but they're also funny and you're like what how and then you're like, oh you were molested. Okay. Yeah, that makes sense. Once the exam you had you had to go through something fucking awful. Yeah develop a personality. So you're right. I mean, I I'm so grateful for those times when I was little and scared and confused and felt abandoned and all of these things and I had great parents who did they couldn't have done better? It's but I was just a sensitive child who needed a little bit more but but I don't think it's serving me anymore to just suck it up and say what are So sorry about what are you?


So sad about you said you said because I really struggled that that's why I keep asking like are you depressed Cho do you know anyone I need to find people who are depressed that my life is so good though. I promise if I was depressed it would be like really disheartening for everybody. But that's that has a life. That's not as fortunate. Right? But I'm I think my depression is also is chemical. I mean, I think it's just like my brain was born that way. There's nothing my parents could have done differently to make me not suffer with depression. In that that I just have to I have to feel I have to have to feel sad like, oh that sucks that I have a brain that tells me to kill myself once a quarter and that I have to have those thoughts and I think those thoughts are right, and I know that I'm not ever going to act on those thoughts but it sucks that I even have to have them.


This is like a correlation though between how well your life is going like when your life is going great and how good you feel? No. No, that's that was the best my life is gone and some of the worst times. Where there's a real solid argument for the chemical imbalance, right? Is there some people that I know that have had depression but they've only had it when their life was in the shitter like when a girl left them or when they lost a job or things started going then they got depression and I'm always like hmm. What is the difference between depression and not doing well, so you feel bad? Yes. There's a difference. Yeah, I think chemical depression that you're discussing. That's the real shit. That's like the real mental like there's a there's like a Clogged pipe or something.


Yes, not going through and it doesn't and I and you look at your life and you look at everything that's going on and you just it doesn't make sense. Why you feel so sad or why you feel like such a fraud or why you feel like you should kill yourself. I mean like right. What's what is that? Right? I don't know nnn and the thoughts are so they're not even like it's I sit down and go. I want to feel sad like think of ways to kill myself. It's like I'll just be sitting there and I'll be like like Like whisper like I did not I don't hear voices, but they're just they're not thoughts. I want to have the thought it's like wallow and it really it. Yeah, I mean, I really I compared it to feel it getting a cold like it just I feel it coming on.


I'm like oh shit, there's not and I don't know what you get these right when you close your laptop after kink.com. Usually that's what I'm feeling pretty good. That's I'm feeling the best is that after I've done that I don't have that depression that people have of like regretting. I mean, I'm disgusted about talking about all this. These things that I'm into when Anna and and honestly, I only masturbate once every two weeks. So this isn't like an addiction for me. It's just but when it comes on at night open train, yeah when I open my laptop and I had to go going into war s anal graduate three like it just women who are going through something scientific kind of Masters course Tom Potter sent me a video the other day.


I'll show it if you like, but I don't remember what I sent him, but he sent me a video of this young lady what to say Hey laughing Maria back, and she's just punching herself in the vagina. Why don't you just don't and it's just going to leave. This is how it going in and I'm like what in the hell I always been so much about the plasticity of vaginas and assholes. It's crazy king.com. It's crazy. It doesn't seem like it should be real a lot can go on. Yeah a lot can fit up there that you just can't even believe there's just something so like oh my god.


Wow. Yeah looks like she's playing that Price is Right game where you punch through? She's just keeps going in there. Oh, she's so angry her face. Oh my God. That's what I'm saying. Yeah. No, no, no, no. No, he's doing it for a long time too. By the way. It's a long video Yeah, Tom, if you ever need like something fucked up. Look at holler at Tom. Okay Thompson. Yeah, Tom and He's got his own fucking weird shit goes finger on the pulse. Yeah, all the strong one of like the balls being shit out of the acts that was so that was kind of weirdly beautiful. Well very unusual. Yeah, first of all to have balls that will make it all the way to your house is weird and not just make it all the way your ass, but go inside like all the tucked inside like he's laying eggs the stuffy puts on to a domed it.


Yeah, so I just set up a camera. I mean that guy's practicing that girl. All that was just violently fisting herself had to like prop up her camera across the room and then go scooter. Somebody else is filming it. Oh, yeah, that's true. But the guy with the balls of his ass, apparently he lets guys fuck him in the ass with his balls and his ass and his favorite thing is fucking guys while he has his own balls in his ass. Yeah. Okay guy. Like Hey, listen, you can't judge. I certainly can't and this is the less alone that there are people out there that Nowhere to stop than I am. There's people into weird shit. That's the weirdest thing about human sexuality is the spectrum of it.


Like how much how we like one thing that you would say to another person would turn them on another person would never call you again. Well, yeah fucking freak. Yep, they'd run away from you. I know and that's why you know so much of us up on king.com. I'm just like get off of her feet. I don't need you to be doing that. Why is it that hurts her nipples take those off her nipples like that all the extra stuff. I just one very I wish I could just I need to just produce my own porn. I think maybe that's your future possibly. I mean, I don't really want to be in it, but I would like to get beyond the camera and make the videos that I'm craving isn't the thing about porn though. Is that like the girls never really make the money it's always the producer and the like the the reason why people are tuning in is for the girl.


Yeah, but the girls never the one who's getting rich, it's always the people but I don't know if anybody's getting rich anymore. I mean, maybe I guess they must be they must be making Fans fans. Yeah. Yeah, but that's goes to the girls right mostly yeah, but when I was when I first bought not the house I'm living in now but another house in the past. I had a neighbor who was born out of control you always have these like like really nice Mercedes Benz parked in his driveway and Porsches and shit and I always was wearing like big fat watches and shit and he was a porn producer and he was laughing around about you know, how much money he made from porn, but then the internet came along Long and it was so quick.


It was so quick where the internet killed his business because this is you know, we're talking about I guess it was like the 90s the early 2000s. He was making all this money and it was DVD sales, right and then all of a sudden the internet came along and online porn and bandwidth just kicked up to the point where you could actually stream it and they foreclosed in this house and I'll never forget that. I'll never forget like finding out that that guy was losing his house. I know. Wow, because that guy was always like so flashy like everything was like gold chains and you had a fucking silver tooth and he was doing coke all the time and they always had girls over his place. He's just making so much money. Yeah, it was from selling porn.


It was not the girls weren't making that money. Yeah, there's like, I mean, it's been a few girls. I'm sure that have made a lot of money in porn but it's real rare it is rare. There's like, you know, like yeah, it's not it's not the girls that I'm seeing on kink.com in fact There's a great documentary on Netflix called hot girls wanted that talks about. Oh I heard about that and it's so it's so upsetting these girls. They find these girls at post ads on Craigslist and they find girls that are fresh out of high school that just want to get out of their small town and they're promised to make a thousand bucks a day, you know, if you do like six shoots maybe and they burn out with in like four months and they make they shoot all these videos that are up forever forever and And they and they get really sick their Vision.


They get like they get over too much use down there and they have to go to the doctor and they have different abrasions and certain things and that's how they get and they then they're doing really fetishy type stuff where girl there's one girl that isn't it that has to do like a brutal session which king.com has a lot of brutal videos, which I hate that word in porn because that's usually like do you just see girls that you're like, oh, she could not have left that shoot feeling empowered about her. L've no matter what I mean. That is it's just so sad what they say and do these girls. And in that in that movie. There was one girl. That was like yeah went to a brutal session today and I had to and she you could just see like the life lost in her eyes and these girls just last they mean a year is a really long time for them to last and I think it's going to be like this glamorous life.


I mean, they're so young, but it that's when you're 18 years old. You're basically a kid. Yeah. You're not really me. You're a Adults only on paper right in size, you know, but your kid like your minds not formed yet and your ideas of what what's okay, and what's not? Okay, they don't the night before your plane ticket to go to Miami live in this house with a bunch of other porn stars. It's like the shitty fucking apartment with the producer who lives with you and you're taking care of his dog. I mean, it's you got that documentaries really incredible and it makes you second-guess. We're where your porn comes from. That's why I gotta pay for my own but it's also the way people look at you forever.


Like if you have a sexual relationship with a person and someone does crazy shit to you. That's just you what you wanted and you both did it and that's okay like, you know, and people maybe people will laugh but they don't have to see it all the time. Right the thing about porn with a woman is if a woman does like some crazy gangbangers from like that that's always going to be there and some guy is you know, like hey that girl that you going to marry check out this link. And someone sends you this link and you oh my God, and you see you see her as if she's right there right now doing this. I know you don't see her as if a person is a person who made a mistake when she was 18 and did this thing but now she's 30 and your lover.


No you still she's whole broken and damn can get over that hopefully but a lot of people aren't strong enough of can't yeah do that. Well, they won't be able to rationalize or or objectively look at those and go listen to made some mistakes some people, you know, some people went to jail for shoplifting and then you know, they realize you shouldn't steal then, you know, they get out and then they live a normal life. No one goes. Oh, yeah, but look, you're a shoplifter forever. Right right, although you know, I relate to some of these porn actresses just in the sense that I've said things and done things on stage or like that.


I'm like, oh no, I that's always going on. I mean like even Hey, I mean someone's going to my husband someday might watch this. Yep, and be like look what you were into and what you admitted. Yeah, but you are a grown woman. You're not a child, right and the man who won but a man who's into that like who's into you would go she's just being honest. I'm just being honest. Yeah, I think that's what I just tried and I like that's empowered. I mean it really is kind of fucked up to be empowered that way because you know what, I mean because I Here wait a minute, you're empowered by watching girls get gang-raped and gagged and fucking pissed on itself. Yeah.


Yeah. Yeah. No, no. No, but but I'll get there. Okay, you can be a grown woman and I can find a man who recognizes and respects you for what? Yeah weird shit you're into as a grown woman, but when you're 18 years old, you're not even an I know you're not a grown-up. I know this is not, you know, you're a person who's like legally responsible. For yourself because you're an adult. It's fucking weird. It's a weird thing because even just regular porn just regular sex. It's strange that we all want to have sex but no one wants to see the person that they have sex with having sex with someone else on film.


I know well, even though I know that they have had sex before you had while Bob locked in here. I know none of Ya Allah it would be interesting to hear. I mean how boyfriend's of people who have done porn. I mean some guy I think some guys can just handle it and they can be okay with I like it. I like when I like hearing about if I'm with my ex-boyfriend not porn but I would if you meet like sex tapes with other girlfriends you want to watch them ha ha ha I would yes. Yeah, I love it. Yeah, put these in a bank vault. I I would watch them all the time. I would want to hear about them on time. I'm really into that. I really love hearing about Out ex-girlfriends or even you know, I hate to even say this because it just sounds ridiculous.


But and maybe I'm not into it anymore. But when I did the last time I had a boyfriend years and years ago, I wanted him to go have sex with other girls and like tell me about it. Really? Yeah, and I'm dr. Drew has told me that there's something wrong with me, but that's what I like. Like that's not a soda wrong with dr. Drew. How about that? Yeah, maybe yeah, he's not perfect. He's not know. No, but I yeah, I like that. I like to go with you. He said that the eye that Nikki he made me look him in the eyes and tell him I'm a naughty you are enough Nikki. Look at me you are enough you are enough that I don't want. I don't want my ex. I don't want my boyfriend to bang someone else because I don't think that I can be enough.


It's because I like he's hot. I just think it's hot and I don't feel threatened by it. Really don't because most of the time if you let your ex if you let your boyfriend bang someone else they don't really want to it's like almost like giving them the license takes away the fun at World of cheating. So it's kind of hard to find guys that are into this and I don't always want it now listen to this podcast. I'm gonna come floating in your damn saying this for years and no one said being a button guys actually don't like this because they want they want their women to only want them and it's not that I don't want them. I want I If I'm I want girl, I'm very turned on by guys who other girls want to fuck like I like having a guy me like he's mine and you you can't have them if you want like I get them and I know you want to fucking but you can't but actually you can and he's going to tell me about it later and you're going to think that you're going to like stealing from me, but you're not we're going to talk about you behind your back later on and I want her to have a really good time.


Dr. Drew's right now. Just screaming taking his headphones off your enough you are enough. No, I'm enough but I just there's it's just what does he how did he how did you guys resolve the conversation? Well, he was the one that was told me that I need to go see a therapist that like helps me feel my feelings. I like found my therapist because doctor was like you need to go to emotionally focused their bus because you don't feel your feelings and you need to find someone who like really mimics your feelings back to you mimics. Yeah, because I don't really let myself get sad or get mad. And you know, I just I kind of just I'm always running from Um one thing to do the next because I don't like to I don't like to feel at all Mmm Yeah, but it's but he just said that yeah my that compulsion to have but it's always been there like at whenever I'm with a guy I want to hear about like when was the last time you hooked up?


What happened? Where did what did you do? What like, I want to know all these things and they think it's a trap. They're like, oh you're gonna get jealous and this is going to lead to like fights later on but I want to like hear about it and talked about it and I don't know it just it really Does it for me I'd say it's a weird thing and he'd rejects that yangzi thinks that it's it means that I have low self-esteem, which I'm not denying I do but that's not what it is. I don't know but I don't think that's where I mean, maybe that's where it comes from but it does it really is I think it's a sexual Kink. Yeah, it's not I'm not a cock. I'm not in the corner like fucking my boyfriend like like sad about like a girl be a cock.


Yeah, I didn't. No girl could be a coach sure. They could I've been just like my one and would stop fucking my boyfriend. Like I can see that but no I'm like in the corner like do it and I don't even want to be involved. I'm just like haha. I love it. She's getting it and like and I'm not just I don't know why I'm not just first of all, I've been fucked by enough guys who haven't wanted to be with me afterwards. So I don't think that my boyfriend's gonna fuck someone to be like, I need to marry her if anything he's gonna be like I need to get away from this trip. Like it'll it'll Kim not want to fuck. Yeah. Yeah, that usually does it based on my experience when you have sex with a guy. He doesn't really want to hang out with you afterwards.


I was hilarious. So the way to keep your man is to let him fuck other girls. That way he won't want to be with him anymore. Yes, and if he does want to be with them go be with them while I don't want to keep you from that, but I just I have a lot of self-esteem in terms of like I'm a cool chick. I feel like yeah, I'm a lot as you said on the last podcast and I was never gonna go out of my head. No, I am a lot and that's a good thing that that bothered you when I said you're a lot it didn't bother me, but it I felt seemed Joe Rogan obscene. I just felt like I'd yeah, I felt like wow he I don't know. I just I I didn't know what to think of you before we have hung out and we really only hung out on the podcast which is this is like a real hang.


I mean, this is no different than if we were alone together and just hanging out as But yeah, I've just felt like my God you really you just try you showed me a part of myself that I was maybe denying because I just picture myself like I'm such a cool chick. I'm so fun and easy. Like what does he even like me and then you go put your lot and it was just like fuck like maybe I'm not the total package that I think I am and that's okay. I'm a lot is not bad. It's not. Okay. No, it's not what I say. You're a lot like, whoa, there's a lot going on there. It's not. Not it's not bad enough. Are you enough look at me? So you're not you're not not you make me look a lot say you're like that's a lot Cyril.


I'm alive. I know you're a lot. I didn't know if you're a lot the whole podcast because it will now I know I'm a lot. Yeah. Well, you know don't talk silly idea. Geez. I thought I was kind of easygoing and chill but I am totally not and I'm alive. I am telling really fun and I let my boyfriend bang on. People but like or I would be into discussing that happening. But yeah, I'm a lot and that's okay. It's okay. That's sure. Yeah, you're fun. Yeah, you're hilarious. I can be really fun. I think that's also it has to be a part of why you're such a good comic they have to be it has to be those. Yeah things have to be connected. Yes. I know. So all that Madness is comes out in the creativity and it comes out your writing and it comes out your performance.


So yeah, that's part of why it's so good. Iceman But you have to know that right I like 85 does what we do is crazy. Yeah, there's no way around it. We're all crazy it just but every my crazy is different than Doug Stanhope is crazy, which is different than just keep going down the line. Everybody's got their own Ali Wong has got her own crazy. Everyone's got their own crazy. Yeah and security. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah II but for you when it comes together, it makes great comedy. Yeah, I'm intense. Yes, and it does I'm really intense I am. You are and I'm already like going over things. I've said here and I'm like, I'm never gonna find a fucking husband you you well not true.


I will hundred percent. Thanks, man. Yeah, no doubt. Yes because someone is this guy like now listening to this talk. I need to find her again. I'm gonna get hit up a lot on this side new shoes out there. I thank you. Yeah, I I'll be I'll be the person I end up with will take me as I am. I'm not I can't I can't change for anyone anymore. I've been doing that too much. But yeah, I will I get The Tonight Show after this interview bladder. That's good. You don't want it like me would you want to do with that thing? I mean, I would like to host a late-night talk show some day. Well it will they will doing it on the internet. No one should ever try to censor, you know way right makes you fun and interesting and special is you always yeah all of you that you showed here not some weird Procter & Gamble version of you that's going to sell tampons on some late.


Bullshit show the fuck out of here with that. That would be a waste of you if you had to do the Ellen DeGeneres show. It would be a fucking waste of you right if they get rid of Ellen because she's so mean and they bring in Nikki Glaser and you have to pretend you give a fuck about dancing for all these people dancing. I bet you did read also like to talk about getting gagged and I know but I can he'll never give me that so because I've admitted this these things but but that is what you should talk about. I know but I could be more than those thing. I want more than anything I could. Save that for here. No, you are all those things. You can do other things here as well right now. I mean here is in the internet. Yes. Yes, you can do other things that you could talk about everything you want to talk about not just little segments.


You have to save parts of it the the parts that are disturbing for some people save that for the people to get it or maybe Freon world is fucked that world of likes. Answered like you don't know who the one of the reasons why the Ellen thing is so fascinating to pee when people find out that she's mean they like like, you know, that's not all she thinks about and talks about what she's doing that show, right? Like if we found out that Jimmy Fallon was secretly doing heroin and fucking guys, you'd be like, I knew it. I knew you couldn't be that that same guy all the time. It's just too too.


That's what pisses me. Right? Why do Wyatt? Why is that the way it is so I don't think I did. No, I don't think they do and why aren't advertisers investing in people who are being honest in what they are. They didn't know they had cast. Yeah, I have a lot of ads know I know you do but this is your leading the type of but this is this is this is mainstream now like the world of Television like the censored view of things. It's not viable anymore because it's not real humans. So that's why the ratings are terrible. The ratings are terrible because Not compelling because you only scratch the surface of human potential of the human personality of human interest.


You only did you dabble in this very shallow pool and you don't wear swimming. Look at this thing here swimming stand up. Yes. It's ankle-high. You're not swimming you're lying on your stomach in a fucking kiddie pool where other people are jumping into the ocean of ideas. And that's the difference, but don't we rest getting in so much trouble with who? I mean, yeah some ads look I'm sure I know for a fact I've said things on this podcast we have lost sponsors, but then more of them come in they take their place. Yeah, but you're not a bad person. You're a good person. That's what I keep going back to it because sometimes I feel like a bad person not a bit about the things I talked about and know that I'm not no there's nothing about you.


That's a bad person. I'm just honest about the way your brain works and everybody's brain works differently. We're all weird. Well, we're different but you don't know. Was weird that's why the Ellen thing is so interesting to people because like thinking she's mean she's secretly mean so she she pretends to be nice, but she's mean, you know, like if somebody just pretends to be this version of someone that we see in a Mary Poppins movie. Are we seeing in some sort of a Disney television show like that's what freaks people out like like, why is that person that like, I think mr. Rogers was really like that. I do tell I think we were getting that's he was honest.


Yeah, that was his on that really Southwest him but that's so rare. But if you found that mr. Rogers has secret cunt you like to spit on people at red lights, you know, like you'd be like what mr. Roger that's why people are freaking out the Royal and because it's reaching out because it was a bit of what we thought it's a scam. Yeah people feel to see also a tyranny of being like the one person who's in charge of this whole empire and all these people hundreds of people work around early Helen. Can I get you tea Ellen? You like crackers and when would you like this shut up get away get away from me. Yeah, I'll have to say for people who don't know Joe Rogan off the show is you're like exactly I was doing this try to make a joke, but I'm like there is no joke to be made.


You're exactly the same. I don't think I could be I don't think I could fake it that long. Right? Like I've done 1500 and whatever the fuck do these things and look up I've displayed bad behavior. I've displayed anger and stupidity of said stupid shit. Have you sent to I am credited for sure. Yeah. You leave something Ali Khan as I say that You really have a good high afterwards and I think about things I said, I was I know that's why scaredy good highlighted or it's the thinking about being mean to people. That's what that's what people or like talking about people talking about that's gonna hurt someone's feelings. I know that's that's when I freaked out about to well that's comes.


Well, there we go people who are actually mean don't worry about hurting people's feelings. They just say it and they don't go back and go. Oh no, what did I say? That's the mark of actually being a good person. He honest things that That actually hurt people and then you get high get high and I got awesomeness said it that way but I really did mean it at the time but I don't want to hurt that person. Yeah, I just want to kind of take that out. And do you apologize to I have apologized before? Yeah, I've done all those things look when you're doing what we're doing. And you know, this is where our three hours in now, right 3:38 right now crazy plot time flies every time when we're doing what we're doing. We're we have no script mean we only shared a couple of text messages.


I don't even talk to Phone to their hero. There's no guests prep. I'm not I'm not getting interviewed before here. And what do you want to talk about and you have a list of things? Yeah we go. Wild. I know we need to get happened. I was like trying to prepare for this like what am I gonna talk to Joe about I go drop that? Yeah, there's no agenda. Well if we did that there's no way you would have been so wild the way, you know, exactly. So you're gonna this is a it's a fucking you thinking what language okay before we can I really came here. Here I need it. I need advice from you in like a real way and you just like what you just said to me really meant a lot. By the way, I needed to hear a I'm not a bad person for the things I said I shouldn't regret anything I say today because I've already second-guessing that and that then there was something I forgot to be very funny comic thank you that felt good to I am going to be in Pittsburgh next Thursday.


And then New Jersey wouldn't you doing a drop doing a drive-in theater, Butler, Pennsylvania this Yellowcake.com yell it out. Please. Come see me. My dad's opening for me. I'm bringing my dad to open for me. He's a musician and we're so poor singing a song together. That's fucking hilarious that were writing. I'm so excited. That's all we're doing a parody of Lady Gaga and Bradley Cooper shallow. We're talking about me living under his roof. It's so good. He's a really good musician and I'm I can do it pretty good Lady Gaga and so I'm really working on that. But um, so yeah, I've please can I plug my date sites? They can come see See me, August 27 through 30 and some songs to Glaser.com.


I got four dates coming up all outdoor shows, Pittsburgh, New Jersey, Massachusetts and Connecticut. All right, be nice to each other people much love. Bye. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you too for Sig mattock, and they're delicious and nutritious mushroom coffee and they're going to hook you up receive up to 39 percent off on their best-selling lion's mane coffee bundles to claim this deal. You must go to four Sig Matic.com Rogan. This is an offer only for JRE listeners. It's not available on the regular website go to RSI GM atic for Sig Matic.com Rogan and get yourself some delicious lion's mane coffee full discount applied at check out.


We're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app the cash app. The number one finance app the world has ever known and when you download the cash app and to the referral code Joe Rogan, that's one word. Third you will receive ten dollars in the cash. Appleson $10 to our good friend. Justin Brands fight for the Forgotten charity. So do not forget use that promo code Joe Rogan all one word. When you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. We're also brought to you by Squarespace the host of my website Joe Rogan.com and the host of your website.


You're going to build your own. I know you can shut up. You can do it go to squarespace.com Joe for a free. And then when you're ready to launch use the offer code Joe to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. I'm telling you it's easy to use and you can make a beautiful website there and we're also brought to you by Buffalo Trace and they're fantastic whiskey how good 2020 Distillery of the year my favorite whisky distilled age and bottled by Buffalo Trace Distillery 90-proof Franklin County, Kentucky Buffalo Trace American Ali owned an independent. Thank you friends. Thanks for tuning in much.


Love to you all bye-bye.