0 (0s):
Hello friends. Welcome to the show. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by rev town genes that the jeans I'm wearing right now, I don't even have to check cause I wear them all the time. They're jeans that look like regular jeans. They fit like designer jeans from Italy, but what they are is some next level shit it's made by a couple of guys who started under armor. So they know about like stretchy scientific fiber type shit for making world-class performance, workout, clothes, and leggings and other gear. Well, they partnered with his old school denim designer in Milan, Italy to create jeans that look and fit amazingly, but feel like you're wearing a pair of sweat pants or yoga pants.

0 (47s):
They're fucking awesome. Like I could legit do a kettlebell workout with the jeans they give in. They move with you just the right amount of stretch and flex, but they're not too thin. They're like a nice durable denim. They look great. I fucking love them. And it's 79 bucks a pair they're less than half the price of some of those bullshit designer jeans that you've been jamming your junk into for years. They're the shit. Pick up a pair at rev town.com/rogan. They got something special just for you motherfucker. Check them out, head over to rev town.com/rogan.

0 (1m 31s):
Upgrade your denim game today. Rev town.com/rogan. We're also brought to you by liquid. I V. This is a product that I use every day. It's easy for me to talk about liquid Ivy. I use their hydration multiplier. Well, I drink it a use it. I do use it, but I just, I dump it into a bottle of water. When I get out of the sauna, I take a, a 16 ounce bottle of water. I empty one of their packets into it. I create it's delicious and it's good for you. It's field with electrolytes and it tastes great.

0 (2m 17s):
Well, their hydration multiplier plus immune support, which is in a Tangerine waiver. It's a cutting edge blend, a vitamin C vitamin D zinc and well Mune. I don't know what well muni is, but I'm sure it's good for you. It's a naturally sourced beta glucan. That's proven to strengthen your immune system. Well, vitamin D absolutely facilitates immune system function and improves your daily defense and vitamin C is well known to help protect your body and support good health. And they're all together in this electrolyte formula that tastes great. The blend is powered by what liquid Ivy calls their cellular transport technology, which is designed to enhance the rapid absorption of water and other nutrients.

0 (3m 3s):
It's awesome stuff. I crave it, especially after the sauna, like I sweat so much in there. I get out, I mixed one of those things up and it just feels good. And for me personally, it's made a big impact on my workouts because I didn't use to supplement with electrolyzed before. And once I started doing it, man cramps went away. All these, I had a few particular problems that would come up every now and again, that stopped happening. Once I started taking liquid Ivy, and it's also a great company, they donate with each purchase. Liquid Ivy donates a serving of liquid Ivy to someone in need. So they're donating 3.7 million servings in response to COVID-19 and the products that are being donated to hospitals.

0 (3m 43s):
They're being donated to first responders, food banks, veterans, and active military. It's an awesome company. They've donated over 6.7 million servings globally, and their new hydration multiplier plus immune support is available at Walmart. Or you can order online and get 25% off. When you go to liquid. I v.com and use the code. Joe Rogan, all one word at checkout. That's 25% off. Anything you order when you use the promo code, Joe Rogan, all one word@liquidiv.com. Get better hydration. Get by with better nutrition today, I added the bipar. Get better hydration today@liquidivy.com promo code Joe Rogan, we are, Oh, so brought to you by Uber

1 (4m 24s):
Scooters. Ooh, Nagi scooters

0 (4m 27s):
Is they sent me one of the things I have never written an electric scooter, but my God, my kids stole this fucking thing from me. I didn't, they didn't steal it from me. I let them have it, but they took it. They never even let me get on it once. They're like,

1 (4m 40s):
Yay. We, and they went flying

0 (4m 42s):
Up the fucking Hill in this thing. It's amazing. You push a button on the handlebar. You give it a little kickoff and you are a cruising, like a magic electric carpet under your feet legitimate. Let's we, we had a Hill that we took it near and my daughter tried it on the Hill and she went flying up this Hill, using materials. They get this down to only 26 pounds. It's made with carbon fiber magnesium. And it folds in one click for easy carrying well using all the space aid shit. They got it down to 26 pounds with 15 miles of range. And it's very fast.

0 (5m 22s):
Seanet just called it the best electric scooter and tech tech crunch calls it the iPhone of scooters. It is a really well-made piece of machinery and it's fucking dope looking and it flies and it'll transform and improve how you get around for a fraction of the price of other forms of transportation. Look, it is way better than walking and way better than jogging. You can zip by in this fucking thing. And they've got an incredible black Friday deal exclusive for this show. You're not going to get this anywhere else. If you order with the web address, I'm about to give you, you're going to get $200, the best electric scooter on the planet. Get your phone out and hit this.

0 (6m 2s):
Now you're going to go to OU Nagi scooters.com/rogan pronounced. Ooh, NA geek, Ooh, Nagi, U N a G I scooters.com/rogan. They're only going to do 500 of these with these this a black Friday deal. So it's first come first serve U N a G I scooters.com/rogan. Get yourself on the best electric scooter and ride free. And we're brought to you by ButcherBox. ButcherBox makes it easy for you to get high quality humanely raised meat that you can trust. They deliver 100% grass fed grass, finished beef, free range, organic chicken, heritage breed, pork and wild caught seafood directly to your door.

0 (6m 50s):
It's an awesome company with super high quality food and an unbeatable value. The average cost is less than $6 per meal. They freeze that meat at the peak of freshness in vacuum sealed bags, and they deliver it to your door in 100%. Eco-friendly a hundred percent eco-friendly recyclable boxes and it's free shipping in the lower 48. They offer five boxes for curated boxes, as well as the popular custom box. So you can get exactly what you and your family love. And with me, I go with the grass fed grass finished rib-eyes they are fantastic. It's top quality. It's my favorite in terms of the way it tastes.

0 (7m 32s):
And it's just fantastic for you. And butcher box is proud to partner with people who believe in better honoring nature animals and the land. And they work to give cattle room to graze 100% grass fed and free to roam on the pasture. They raise hogs on pasture or in hoop barns free to do with hogs. Do they ensure that chickens have outdoor access with no cages, no crates or crowding and the uphold strict fishing and handling practices. When it comes to wild-caught sustainably harvested seafood, it's a great company. And for a limited time, new members can get six free grass fed grass finished steaks. When they go to butcherbox.com/rogan, that's two New York strips.

0 (8m 13s):
And to top sirloin steaks added to your first box for free. When you go to butcherbox.com/rogan act quickly, this offer is only good through cyber Monday. Today. This might be the longest podcast of 2020 for me. I think it is right, Jamie. I think it's the longest Tom green and I were not. We started off sober and then it ended drunk. It was a, a long and fun conversation with a man who Tom green is one of the main influences for me in starting a podcast. When I went over to his place, we talked about this ad nauseum on the show itself.

0 (8m 56s):
Cause I always say it. He's the reason why I thought about doing it. Like I could. He was one of the very first influences where I saw his house, that he had set up like a television studio. And I was like, Holy shit. Look what Tom green is doing. And it planted the seeds for me to decide to eventually start doing my own podcast. He's always been cool as fuck. He's a really good guy. He's funny as hell. And he's just fun to be around. I love him to death please. Welcome

2 (9m 23s):
Tom green. The Joe Rogan experience train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night, all day central character, Tom green, Joe. How are you?

0 (9m 37s):
You're you're the wild man living in a van now. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. You, you are that eccentric character. You go from being a television and movie star to being a wild man. Traveling the land with your vagabond dog that you got from another country. She's a rescue from The Bahamas. Yeah,

3 (9m 55s):
Charlie. Yeah. She's rescued from Bahamas. Goddamn adorable. By the way. I love her. She's beautiful. And I'll show you I'll show you are

0 (10m 1s):
This sixth century character. Now look at you,

3 (10m 3s):
I guess. So I feel like maybe I feel like in some ways what I'm doing right now is the most normal thing I've done in my life, but it is actually kind of crazy too,

0 (10m 11s):
Compared to people, but I think it fits you like a glove. I really do. Yeah.

3 (10m 16s):
Yeah. Well, you know, I like going out into the wilderness. I always have, and I've been out in this van that I just got, which is amazing. And I'm going pretty hard with it like that.

0 (10m 27s):
That's the first time you've been tested since you got tested the last time on my show,

3 (10m 30s):
I got tested one time between, but that's another interesting story, but let's hear it. What happened? Well, my ex wife asked me to come on our talk show and I hadn't talked to her in 15 years. Oh, we drew drew. Yeah. So and so was that a trap? It was nice. It was nice nervous. It was nice. It was nice. We had a good time. That's cool. And, but I had to get tested to do the show and, but it was interesting cause you know, I mean, it was very sort of interesting thing. Cause you know, we hadn't talked in 15 years at all at all and, and then, you know, all of a sudden, you know, I got a call from our city and we're coming to the new Chubb and her shows her new shows really pretty wacky, you know like she's, she's getting really kind of like a, you put your hands out for wacky.

3 (11m 13s):
Oh yeah. She's definitely pushing it in a very sort of, I mean I enjoying the show. It's very funny what she is doing. Very, very, very over the top. Some of the things she does on there,

0 (11m 22s):
That's representative her of her as well.

3 (11m 25s):
It reminds me a lot of, of, of her. Why don't you do it as her? Yeah, for sure. What she really is like who she really is. I think so. Yeah.

0 (11m 32s):
As you get older, like you tend to be able to figure out who you really are better. Like, like with you like doing this van thing. Yeah.

3 (11m 39s):
I'm the guy I live in down by the river on the van. Yeah. It makes sense to me.

0 (11m 42s):
You told me you were going to do that. I'm going to travel across the country and just drive around the van with my dog. I was like that. I could see you enjoying that.

3 (11m 50s):
Yeah. You know, it's, it's, it's a whole world, man. It's a whole world that you didn't that I didn't really even know about. Like, I didn't know in Canada, it's called crown land here. It's called BLM land Bureau of land management land. I'm sure you know all about that from hunting and going out into the wilderness. I didn't really know about Bureau of land management land and there's certain apps that will show you all the fire roads, all the remote places that you can go and do dispersed camping, go boondocking. They're called

4 (12m 20s):
Javan have off-road capabilities. Can you drive on rugged trails? Yeah,

3 (12m 24s):
Pretty good. I got like a, it's not, it's not an off-road vehicle. It's, it's a, it's a Ram ProMaster, 2,500 it's you know, a delivery truck that they convert into.

4 (12m 34s):
A lot of people are doing that these days. My friend Tim Poole did that. He got, I believe he got a Ram as well. Yeah. This was a Ram. Wasn't a Jamie. I think it's a Ram as well. And he did the same thing. Turned it into a bug out. Van

3 (12m 45s):
Is wider than a, than a Mercedes sprinter van, which you see a lot of it's wider. So I can actually sleep full width wise. The beds would wide with wise at the back. But, but you know, it was just kind of happened pretty randomly. I saw this clip online and these guys in Arizona who convert the vans, I called them up. They, they were on shark tank. They're these guys there's called boho. This fans called Bahali really cool dudes

4 (13m 10s):
Boho. Yeah. Both B O H O.

3 (13m 13s):
Yeah. And by the way, they are like, they love this, that I'm here right now. They're your biggest fan. They look literally watch every episode of your show. And so they're going to take a shit right now. They're probably really happy that I'm mentioning them on the show, but they, they were on shark tank. They just, these two young guys, they started this company where they bought Ram pro masters, totally independent thing. And they do this great carpentry. Like they build, build out the inside

4 (13m 38s):
Cedar that you have images of your, your van online. That's the inside of the banner. <inaudible> that's nice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

3 (13m 47s):
And see, like I got my speakers set up and the thing that's, that's kinda like this in the Mojave desert. There's Charlie chillin.

4 (13m 56s):
Yeah. Yeah. So when you say you have your studio, so you're doing your podcasts from the road. Yeah, exactly. And how will you doing it? Like whenever you feel like it, you just fire up the podcast when you've got something to say and yeah. Cause that thing looks killer in there. Yeah. She tells me you got a little kitchenette set up and how you cook. It airs. There's a event. Oh, you got an awning and I'm

3 (14m 19s):
Shooting these drone shots too, which are pretty fun.

4 (14m 21s):
I'm rolling. Drones. Look at this. Yeah.

3 (14m 25s):
Mojave, check out all those Joshua trees burned. Those are burned, Joshua trees. But so, you know, it's, it's kinda like, you know, I've always been into the techie kind of building out studio stuff. Right. So that's where, when I found out about these vans, the thing that really kind of piqued my interest is the battery and solar technology that exists now. So there's two solar panels on the roof and in the back I've got these batteries. Okay. They're, they're really, they're called Battleborn batteries. They're like really solid. Like they use them in sailboats to go around the world basically. And there's four of them and the solar panels are charging them constantly. So I've built, I've got my computers, I've got my cameras, I've got my drone, I'm charging batteries all the time.

3 (15m 12s):
I've got a refrigerator in there. So I, I, you know, I kind of, you know, cold beer. Right. And, and it's sweet. So I can go out into the middle of nowhere and have virtually unlimited electronic capability and just stay there as long as I want until I run out of food.

4 (15m 30s):
Wow. And so those solar panels, how efficient are they? Like, well, they, they power your studio and all that stuff where you don't have to use your, your engine. You don't have to start up and use gas. Exactly. But you run a diesel in your van. No,

3 (15m 44s):
But that just, that just happened to be the way it went because that van was available. And I got that one, but how's the gas mileage. That's pretty good. I'll tell you one thing though. I am always filling up. Like I never let it go below three quarters of a tank because just in case shit gets, I never know where I'm going every day. That's the, like, I got some weird stories over the last six weeks where I've just been like, not sure where I'm going to sleep and it's the sun's going down. And then I end up going down a crazy road. And then the first night I got stuck in the Mojave desert because I looked up on this app, dispersed fire road, I'm thinking, Oh, that's pretty cool. You know, I get there, there's a sign that says tortoise's crossing careful.

3 (16m 26s):
I didn't start driving out into the desert. I'm 200 yards in, I get stuck because it's the soft sand gets stuck in the soft sand. So I've been a little more careful, but, but get out and you get stuck in the soft sand called AAA. When it comes to the desert, I was a hundred yards from the, from the, from the freeway. It was like gotten into it yet. It was so pathetic. It was hilarious actually, because I've been planning for months, you know? And then all of a sudden I'm like, I'm seeing the, you know, the free, this was outside.

4 (16m 55s):
Can I, that before we get into your adventure and I want to, I want to get more into this van bill. Yeah. So you started it out with just buying this van. Is it a new van or did you buy it brand new? So you bought a brand new van and then you bring it to these boho guys and these guys w what do they do they ask you? What do you plan on doing? You plan on using this as a studio? Like your idea from the jump was to do your podcast on the road with no, no plans other than your own whims. Right. So when, when you do something like that, how do you know what you're going to need? You didn't really have any experience in like off-roading or that kind of not really living out of a van.

4 (17m 35s):
How did you know what you're going to need? Like, how did you research it?

3 (17m 38s):
Yeah, so, well, there's, there's a couple of categories of research. One was just building the studio itself. So I built the studio at home first. That was just the, the, you know, nitty gritty technical, you know, and what kind of microphones, what kind of amps and preamps I'm going to use. And I have some apps that use tubes. I got rid of those because I figured the tubes had rattled out in the dirt road, so boring techie stuff. But, but as far as the survival and the food and the, and all of that, and the van they've been real great. Like I built my studio equipment into a roll case, and I know, I knew that I thought, well, that could fit under the bed.

3 (18m 19s):
And then we are planted where there's a little door that opens and you can access it under the bed. And we've wired all the cables through the walls and it's pretty efficient. So,

4 (18m 30s):
So you had everything, you need to do a podcast down into one box. You can just pull that box out and then you, right.

3 (18m 36s):
It's actually, it's, it's actually permanently housed under the bed. So I just, I have a table that pulls out that table. I was sitting out there and just under there a little door opens microphones, plugged in and away you go. But the other side of it is like a lot of the video stuff too. Like the drone, the cameras, like I've, I've got some new cameras that I'm kind of messing with that are exciting to me. And so, so I'm kinda out there. The thing that I was thinking, I was thinking

4 (19m 4s):
Bored out here. Yeah. That's what I was going to ask all alone or lonely. Am I going to get bored or lonely? Yeah. And

3 (19m 11s):
I haven't because I've populated the van with stuff to do. So when I get bored of the drone, then I'm making music too. So I've made a, it's a recording music studio to listen to music while I'm doing some sort of different stuff. I've got my acoustic guitar. So I'm going to start doing some, some country rap type of you're going to go on and tour country rap. I call it crap. Joe, it's continuing to go on tour. Maybe, maybe. Yeah. As a singer. Oh yeah, no, I could see that. No, I dunno. I dunno. I mean, I probably maybe incorporate it into my standup or something like that. You know, I, you know, I was a rapper when I was a teenager.

4 (19m 50s):
Yeah. I remember. Yeah. So w so to get back to this build-out so you get it where you're, you're ready. You still have your house in LA, right. And then you decide, all right, let's do it. You start the car up and you go, where did you go?

3 (20m 6s):
I drove out a drove boat into the Mojave desert, and it's the first place with the destination was Utah. And so I started by going out to the Mojave desert. And what, what type of, what time of the year was this? This was, I guess six or seven weeks ago. I guess I've been on the road ever since. Wow. Haven't haven't it was great.

4 (20m 25s):
And just eating out of your van. Yeah.

3 (20m 27s):
So that was part of planning, like the food. So I've got these big Rubbermaid containers and the trunk, four of them. Do you have a refrigerator? I have a refrigerator. Yep. That's is that solar powered as well? It's runs off the electric system. So the solar is charging the batteries and the batteries run electric for the whole van. All the lights are led, so it's effective, efficient, and the fridge is also high efficiency cooler, essentially. So

4 (20m 54s):
Like one of those rollout cores that people have right.

3 (20m 57s):
Under one of the seats, it's called a Dometic.

4 (21m 2s):
Cause there's a lot of guys who do what are the, it's not, they don't call it. Off-roading what do they call it? When they go out into the boom doggedness, boondocking? I don't think they're called that.

3 (21m 12s):
Okay. That's, that's, that's the van life term for, for what people are doing with these vans now, but where they go off grid. And I think, I think it's a Filipino word from the U S million.

4 (21m 26s):
There's a lot of people that plan, they think get a kick out of meticulously planning, like a 500 mile venture through the off-road through the wilderness with these like offer. I forgot why they call it tracking goddammit. Oh yeah. Yeah. But it's a there's I got into it for a while. I went down a rabbit hole. There's tons of videos on YouTube of these guys. Overlanding sorry. That's what I call it overlap.

3 (21m 52s):
So I'm not going, you know, I don't have extra fuel, so I've got my tank of fuel. So I usually, when I get off the main highway, I make sure I've got a full tank and I've never, I've, I've gotten close to running out of fuel.

4 (22m 7s):
You thought, now that you've had this thing for six weeks, you've be doing six weeks to make revisions, like, like maybe have some exterior fuel canisters, maybe put an extended range gas tank in. And you're thinking about all these things. Yeah. I love these questions. Yeah. Over Landers do all that stuff.

3 (22m 24s):
So there's like, yeah, definitely. Definitely. You know, the thing is, is this van is, is, yeah, I could. I mean, look, I'm, I'm amazed how remote you can go. Just, and this is what I kind of talk about on my social media and some of the videos I'm making YouTube, I'm sometimes sort of telling people like, Hey, you know, if you're like sitting around at home right now and you're bored and you're angry about shit and you want to, you can just get in your car and drive out to these beautiful places. You know, the last week I was on the top of a mountain in the Lincoln national forest, right on the border of New Mexico and Texas.

3 (23m 11s):
And I mean, you're, there's drone shots. Where it's you just, nobody for him seems like a hundred miles. Like I drove for an hour up this two lane paved highway, and didn't see a car the entire time driving there. And then you get up there and you find a place to camp and there's there. It's hunters are up there. So there's lots of disperse spots with fire pits. And you're up there all by yourself. And you get up in the morning and I make coffee with this gas kettle. So I'm not eating my battery. And you know, they've got all these propane tanks. I got a Coleman stove and cooking with my Coleman stove.

3 (23m 53s):
I mean, I've got lots of cans of beans. I mean, a lot of spam and rag goo. I remember you gave me some shit about the Ragu last time. It was pretty good. The rag.

4 (24m 1s):
I don't think I gave a shit if it was just kind of joking around,

3 (24m 4s):
But yeah, but like, you know, I, I'm eating a lot of canned food because part of the, part of what happened was this started from the whole quarantining. Right. I got all this canned food for the house and I was just cooking for myself. And then I thought, you know, like, I could just take this out, take this on the road.

4 (24m 20s):
You're spending a lot of time with no people. Like, did it feel weird coming here? This is all the people, security people here. And Jamie and Jeff and me feel weird. Okay. All these people, what does it feel like?

3 (24m 35s):
You know, it's interesting because you start to feel a little bit, and I think this is probably something that maybe is affecting everybody with the, the, the quarantining and the pandemic and all that stuff. Maybe not, maybe, maybe, certainly not. Everyone's in their van, but you start to get to the point where you think maybe I, I didn't get social anxiety coming here because like, I know you guys are getting all tested and all that stuff, but I have a little bit, you know, I have a little bit more paranoid about getting this virus. Then

4 (25m 5s):
The average person has of cancer because the fact that you have cancer, I think so. Yeah. It makes sense.

3 (25m 10s):
You know? Cause I just don't, it's not even that. I feel like I'm more susceptible to it. It's just, I really hate being sick. When I had cancer, it was in the hospital for six weeks. It was like painful. It's I just hate it. I hate that loss of control, you know? So, so, but no, I mean,

4 (25m 27s):
Gary self, like vitamin wise, you'd taken like supplements.

3 (25m 32s):
I think I'm eating pretty healthy. I don't take spam and Ragu, but I mean like there's a lot of vitamins slowed down. There's a lot of vitamins and that stuff. No look I'm I'm, I'm, I'm exercising. I'm doing a lot of walks. That's cool.

4 (25m 48s):
That's good. You into these woods. Are you getting any fresh vegetables at all?

3 (25m 53s):
I have canned corn. I have, I have a large quantity of canned corn is barely a vegetable. I was told, I was told corn, rice and beans is enough for substances.

4 (26m 7s):
Yeah. He could stay alive. Just trying to stay alive. No. I want you to take care of yourself like vitamins and nutrients and like corn is,

3 (26m 16s):
I have onions. That's not good. They last a long time and potatoes.

4 (26m 20s):
Yeah. Well it was a little bit in potatoes. Potatoes kind of live off the land.

3 (26m 23s):
That's a long time I have, I mean, full disclosure, just to be clear. I have done a few, you know, curbside pickup at Walmart and I've got oranges. So I've got oranges go inside. Yeah. Not, not really trying to, not to go inside. I have, I have gone inside a couple of times. Admittedly. I'm nervous about going inside a Walmart. I did. I did do it once. Yeah. Cause, cause it was late and I was quite hungry,

4 (26m 49s):
But you're hardcore with this fear of the virus.

3 (26m 54s):
I'm not sure how yes I am. Yes I am. I am sure that I am, but I also am enjoying not enjoying that's the wrong word I am. I'm just trying to see if I can do it too. I'm trying to see if I can do it. Is it possible to go remote off the grid and just sort of be disconnected from the, the, the luxuries that we're used to having in life of being able to go to a Walmart and grab any food you want? You know, I'll have some sushi, you know. Okay. I think I'll grab a plate, a fresh cut steak. I mean, it's kind of interesting to kind of go out into these places that are incredibly remote and beautiful and to cook on a, on a open flame.

3 (27m 35s):
And I brought a fishing rod haven't caught anything yet. Have you done any fishing? I did a little bit, but I honestly haven't had a lot of, are you getting your licenses online, online, online? Yeah. Yeah. I, I, I also, I did British shotgun

4 (27m 49s):
As well. Oh, Jesus for protection or for birds?

3 (27m 53s):
Well, I have I've I've been hunting, but I have not actually seen an animal yet.

4 (27m 59s):
No animals at all. No. You bring your dog. I might be a part of the problem.

3 (28m 5s):
No, I don't bring the dog actually. I don't.

4 (28m 7s):
So when you say you go hunting, what are you hunting for?

3 (28m 9s):
Well, I, in my mind it would be, it would be for birds. I'm a bird gun, so, but it's a 12 gauge.

4 (28m 18s):
That's an alley gun. Yeah. Birds.

3 (28m 21s):
Is it? Well, I guess I got, yeah, I guess so it's a Benelli docks, I guess maybe I don't even know what I'm doing, Joe. Yeah,

4 (28m 28s):
But w but, but birds, are you targeting?

3 (28m 30s):
No, not really. Honestly. I honestly have it just cause I feel like when I I'm going in bear country and when I go walk and deep into the woods, I kind of feel a little nervous. So I've got my bear spray. I've got my, you know, hunting knife. I've got my hands ready to rock. I'm ready to rock. But I honestly, I just like to walk in the woods and I like to go deep out into the woods and I bring a compass with me and I go way out not I have the system to not get lost. Okay. I know it sounds I have a system. What's the system. Well, basically, so like last, last, last week I was up on this mountain, top in the Lincoln national forest.

3 (29m 12s):
And so there was a sort of a long, straight I'd call it like a ravine or something. So I just walked straight along that ravine, I knew that would lead back to the van. And I followed that until like probably a mile or so until I hit a landmark that went that way, it was a sort of a limestone ledge that went straight. So I don't go so far that I'm going in circles. Right. But I'm always keeping very good track on those landmarks. And I just know that, okay, I've walked, walked a mile down to this ravine and this ravine to this, to this, a limestone ledge, and I'll walk a mile that way.

4 (29m 52s):
Do you find yourself way more aware of where you are because you have to be responsible for yourself and because you are alone off grid different than you would be, that if you were with a bunch of friends wandering around, you probably wouldn't be paying that much attention.

3 (30m 8s):
I love it. It's my favorite thing. You know, I, I really do love it. You know, we talked about it before, you know, how I used to go out and canoe trips in Canada when I was a kid. And just, you know, this is the first time I've ever done it alone, alone. I've never done camping alone before who goes camping alone. But you know, I th there's something even really extra special about it. And so

4 (30m 28s):
I have a lot of friends who really enjoy it

3 (30m 30s):
And to clarify, like I do bring the dog with me on a lot of these walks and when I have the shotgun, but I have no intention of firing the gun. Cause I don't wanna hurt her ears. Right. But, but, but if I ever went with the intention of possibly firing the gun, then, then I leave her. You know,

4 (30m 50s):
You have to worry about coyotes with her. Huh?

3 (30m 52s):
Well, yeah. And she, she, this was, this has happened a couple nights ago. It was really kind of interesting dogs.

4 (30m 59s):
We should let her be. No, she's, she's a little doggy, but she's adorable. Everyone say hi to her the other night say hi chopper other night, I sweetie. She was sleeping. You could tell she was like, dad. Yeah. I was just dying.

3 (31m 18s):
We were surrounded by them multiple times. We've been surrounded by them in the van at night. Like, so it was sort of late at night and had a campfire going. And we just heard like, you know, I don't know more than I've ever heard. Actually they must've been like nine 30 or something out there. And they were howling. And, and for a moment she barked and then I said, Wyatt, and then she sort of realized I could see her realize because she barks at everything. There's a video I've put up on my YouTube, which is pretty funny because you know, we saw some, we saw have Alina, you know, well, don't kill your dog. Yeah. We were in the van. So you're driving down this road and this was in New Mexico and I'm getting a camera to get this shot of this, you know, wild boar.

3 (32m 1s):
And she's not

4 (32m 1s):
Really, Havoline is not really a pig. It looks like a pig, but it's not. It's a, peccary, it's a different kind of animal.

3 (32m 8s):
Yes. I think it was a, it wasn't a wild board was a Halina. Yeah. I think it was, yeah. I'd never seen one before. Where was this New Mexico? In the, in the Gila national forest. Helix. Helix. Yeah. So she's so cute. So she starts barking at it. Look at this. Yeah, there it is. I got video footage of it. You'll see, she starts barking and then it runs off.

4 (32m 32s):
So fuckers, they killed Stan Hope's neighbor's dog. Oh really? Yeah. They, they it's interesting that it's by.

3 (32m 40s):
Yeah. So actually later we were just up the road. We drove by a river,

0 (32m 44s):
Look at her, she barks and then she yawns she's so well taken care of. She's not worried.

3 (32m 49s):
Good job pulling that video up. That's pretty impressive. You guys. Wow. Beautiful. So that next shot there. So this is the deer. She scares the deer away here. And this is, that is just outside of Las Cruces, New Mexico.

0 (33m 3s):
He got a few deer out there. There was

3 (33m 5s):
A lot out there. Yeah. And I've got, that's not actually my

0 (33m 10s):
Good, that's a New Mexico, New Mexico. And she's barking at the deer. Yeah. Yeah. What time when did, when was this?

3 (33m 16s):
This was a week ago. They might be in seasoned sun. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. There's I mow when I'm in, when I'm out for my walk, I got my, my orange Hunter orange.

0 (33m 28s):
Do you have a license to shoot deer habitat?

3 (33m 31s):
I don't know. No. I just have a small game license just for it.

0 (33m 36s):
New Mexico. If you got a deer, do you know what to do with it?

3 (33m 39s):
Well, I, I, I'm not here to have tension of here because I'm by myself. I mean, what am I going to do with it? You know? Well, you don't have enough refrigerator. You have <inaudible> book on a small game. My preparation. Oh really? Oh, I loved your, your episode of that. By the way.

0 (33m 53s):
I just did one with him a couple of days ago. A new one? Yeah. Oh yeah. How long ago was that? Five days ago. Five episodes ago. Week. Yeah. He's awesome. I particularly liked the little fish look at that little fish. I particular she's so cute. First thing she did to me is bite me. She can run it out to her wagon, to him a bit, my fingers, like she just wants to play. How old is she?

3 (34m 16s):
She's slowly. Six and a half months.

0 (34m 19s):
Yeah. She's so cute. She's so playful too.

3 (34m 21s):
Yeah. But yeah, I so like full, full disclosure though. Like I never really hunted before. I don't, I'm not a Hunter. I've never heard it before. Lot of fishing grew up fishing got a ton of that, but I just, I do like, I just, I just, there's something about being all alone in the middle of nowhere. Yeah. At night, surrounded by coyotes that I I'd be lying if I say it wasn't a little bit scary. Like it's, it's a little bit,

0 (34m 52s):
There's something about those low alone trips that people say you're, you've you do sort of a, an inventory of your life and start assessing your, your behavior and who you are and you're alone for so long that you're, you're forced to sort of think about what you've done. And are you happy with your choices in life? Are you happy with your job? Are you happy with your relationships? Is that what you're experiencing? So, yeah. Yeah. My friend Aaron Snyder, he's been on the podcast before he owns Cafaro. It's a big backpack company. They make like really super high-end hunting backpacks.

0 (35m 33s):
And he spends hundreds of days a year in the woods by himself. Yeah. Either by himself or with other people hunting. And he goes on these long backpacking solo adventures, hunting where he goes deep into the woods, many, many, many miles in by himself with just this camp on his back. That's it. And that's the thing that he's always said is that you, you know, you get in there. And then when, once you get back to civilization, you want to call ex-girlfriends and apologize, call friends and men fences. And you know, just sort of like give you an inventory of what you've been saying. I think sometimes we get caught up in momentum in life. You know, that life is a series of things that you have to do. You wake up in the morning, you have to be at work at a certain time.

0 (36m 14s):
You try to get to the gym, you try to get this. And then you have a phone calls you have to make. And then you have to, you know, sync your calendar with the other people you work with. And then there's this and that. And then you're planning for in two weeks, we have that meeting and this and that and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And you get so caught up in momentum. You never stop to take a breath and look at yourself and look at what you're doing. He goes, this is what I like, is this what I want to do? Or is this something that I'm just, am I on this? Like sled, that's flying down the side of the snow covered mountain. I don't know exactly how I'm going to get off of it. Yeah.

3 (36m 47s):
Huh. And you made me think of something. A lot of the places I've been no cell service. And so it's three days and like maybe a textile fire out, but there's no video. There's no, no reading YouTube comments, no reading YouTube comments. Yeah. There's been a few days where I'll get the, the, the cell service

0 (37m 8s):
And then immediately check the comments more than, yeah.

3 (37m 11s):
Yeah. I know we've talked about this before. I want to try to adopt that. What is it? You said post and ghost. I love that. And ghost, I want to try to adopt that because I have sort of gone the opposite approach. I'm like kind of interacting very much with, with, with those comments and I'm sure the

0 (37m 27s):
Fans like that, the nice fans, I find

3 (37m 29s):
It kind of a fun creative exercise. Like sometimes I'll have, you know, a hater or whatever, and then I'll get into a little thing with him and it's fun. But for the most part, I've created kind of a very positive thing, but, but like what's fun is just getting away from it from the phone. But like what you said is exactly what it's been like going through that. I just love it out there. And, and, and what have you learned about yourself? Definitely. That I've been on my phone too much, but I think, I think one thing that I've learned is that it, it, that I, I actually do pretty well being alone. Actually. I was, I was worried that maybe I would, would not be able to, like, I thought one of the things I was thinking when I started this whole process of planning, it was planned for several months, getting the van, getting all the stuff ready.

3 (38m 17s):
I thought, what if I get out there and I can't stand it? You know, what if I don't, you know, two days in, but I gotta go home. I need my shower in my bed. But, but I actually, after a couple of days, I just started to really kind of get very relaxed and you start to kind of feel a very, a nice connection with, with, with, with nature, I guess. I mean, yeah. You know, I'm, I'm, I'm going to bed at eight at night, nine at night, waking up at five 30 in the morning, you know, making my coffee as the sun is rising over a mountain. And so I'm watching the sunrise and it's cold. It's cold in the morning up there, man. So especially when I was up in Northern Utah, like cold, but there's a whole system to keep the van warm and stuff too.

3 (39m 3s):
But, but so the sound system to keep me in the van warm well, so the first few weeks I didn't have the proper insulation on the windows. So I ordered this stuff that for the van windows, glue it to the windows are so magnets, magnets, you just take it off. It's a nice, thick, thick, a sort of a padding. Yeah.

0 (39m 24s):
So you heat up the van inside and then you put that up,

3 (39m 27s):
Put it on first. I just put it on. I put it on the covers, the windshield, the two front passenger, the all, all windows they're completely sealed. And then I start the engine and I run it. I don't run the gas out, but I, you know, run it for 10 minutes. The thing heats up and then I just don't open the door. And then I do that right? When it's time to kind of crash, how long does it keep it warm for? You know, it's warm until I fall asleep. And then I wake up in the morning, freezing my butt off. But no, it's not too bad. I mean, I, I don't think this would be something that you would want to go out in the winter in, but, but, but you know, this time of year it's and down here in Texas, it was, it was nice to last, last few.

0 (40m 6s):
There's a guy, who's got a video. He he's living out of his van, too, doing the same sort of situation. He's very organized, got the whole deal, but he's doing it in Colorado. And he's in the middle of the winter, like covered in snow and does all these detailed things like how he gets out of snow and what he does and how he stays warm.

3 (40m 25s):
It's I imagine it would be a lot less simple up in that kind of,

0 (40m 31s):
Well, just camping in cold weather is rough. You know, you have to have the right insulated sleeping bag. You have to make sure that you have yeah. Down booties down booties

3 (40m 42s):
By my new discovery on the internet. Right. This is, what's hilarious about the world we're living in now with the internet and everything. Having access to everything before I left to start researching, Oh, Oh, here's a guy talking about winter, camping down booties, right? There's all these little feathery down things. Can you put them on your bare feet at night? And you wear them in your sleeping bag or, and your feet are warm, right. If your feet are wet. So I start like, sort of seeing all these little things that, that I, Oh, that'll help, you know, you know, these little products and you go on, Amazon shows up at your house the next day and your supplies start building up, you know? But yeah, I have these down booties and, and you know, I've got, I've got nice, you know, Marina wool under garments and things like this.

3 (41m 27s):
And I think I'm as a Marina wool as hunting stuff, you know?

0 (41m 31s):
Well, it was great because when you wet it

4 (41m 34s):
Doesn't make you cold. Yeah. If you get wet in cotton and then you get cold, you're in trouble. Yeah. Like the issue is if you're going somewhere and you're hiking and it's cold out, well, even though it's cold out, if you're hiking and you're wearing a lot of layers, you're going to sweat. But if you sweat and you weren't cotton, you're in big trouble. Because as soon as you cool off that wet cotton freezes it's feels terrible. But wool is different. Wet wool keeps you warm. Like you can be in wool and it gets wet. It's wet still. It's not the most comfortable thing, but you're warm. Right. It's, it's very interesting. Yeah. Cause I guess, cause it's like an animal fiber, you know?

3 (42m 14s):
Yeah. I mean, it's, it's, it's, it's been relatively comfortable. There's been a few nights where I've been little colder than I would've liked to have been, but, and a lot of the places right now I've been right now, I've, it's no fires cause of the cause of the drawing. So, so there's, you know, but the last week I was in a place I could have a fire. So keep a nice campfire gone. I was in a, that was up in the Heela national forest, Lincoln national forest, Lincoln national.

4 (42m 41s):
So you went to New Mexico and then you drove your way up to Austin.

3 (42m 45s):
Well, first I actually first, so one of the most beautiful places I went by the way was in Utah. I went to this place called the Valley of the gods on the I've heard of them on the Navajo reservation there. Oh my gosh. Yeah. Oh, there's a video of that. I don't know if you have a video of that drone shot. That is, it's like they shot all the John Wayne movies out there and monument Valley. And then just down the road is this place called the Valley of the gods. Look at this place. So all alone right there.

4 (43m 8s):
That's you look at that? That's your drone footage.

3 (43m 10s):
Yeah. Wow. And you know, a big part of this for me is also looking for places that are gonna photograph well, you know? Cause I, I enjoy photography and video. So

4 (43m 21s):
All this stuff on Tom green.com is this on your YouTube channel?

3 (43m 24s):
You're on my YouTube channel. Yeah. Yeah. And then I link it to my website. It's on Tom green.com too. Yeah. So, so I get these shots. You see Charlie chilling out there. Charlie is like intrigued by the drone. Like the first 10 times I've flown it. She just sort of see she's going under the van. Cause she hears the drone coming. Did you call her chopper and Charlie? No, I, I I'm just not sure.

4 (43m 46s):
Did someone call her chop or did I just call her chopper?

3 (43m 49s):
No, no, no, maybe. Yeah. That's a good, that's your new nickname? That's your new middle name? Charlie chopper.

4 (43m 54s):
Chopper. Did someone else call her chopper outside?

3 (43m 57s):
Yeah. Charlie. Charlie. Yeah. Nate named after travels with Charlie, the John Steinbeck novel Travis. And if you see on the van, see at the back, you can't read it, but there's a blurry word right above the rear wheel. It's Rocinante, which is what yeah. Right there, which is Steinbeck called his fan Montay, which is named after Don Quixote's horse. So there's multiple layers of Omada is there, but look at that shot. Isn't that amazing? Yeah.

4 (44m 23s):
That's amazing. I love your, your shirt too. That's a very lumberjacky shirt you're wearing now.

3 (44m 28s):
Oh yeah. It's warm. It's warm. Yeah. The last shot of this video. I don't know if you can just pull that ahead. So pretty the lash of this video, I waited for sunset. Oh, here's my, here's how I take a shower.

4 (44m 38s):
So you can just go out there and camp anywhere you want. Just pull over and camp. Yep. Now, do you have any concern about running into serial killers?

3 (44m 45s):
Well, that's why I got the shotgun joke, but you know,

4 (44m 49s):
Oh look like a serial killer. Like you look like it could like if I was going through there with my family and then you're like, hello, when you're just waving I black off. Fuck.

3 (44m 59s):
Yeah. Yeah. They don't want him as crazy. You know, I look at the last shot right after this. So there's this, this sunset I kind of like, look at those, those Buttes in the background. See that the shot after this one and just let her just let it roll. You'll see it. Let it roll. You'll see. But there's I kind of like to wait for the sun to get these nice shots. So this is the shot here. Watch this drone shot is pretty cool. So, and to kind of get these interesting images, you'll see the sun will go

4 (45m 24s):
Now, what do you strap on the drone? Is it to built in with Scottish

3 (45m 27s):
Camera on it? So this is just not even a super look, watch the sun disappear. And then, and then the music that's playing, his music that I made and the vans a score. You could, you can play the audio if you want it to my music, but it's a score. I'm doing this sort of ambient score

4 (45m 45s):
Drugs. Are you getting,

3 (45m 47s):
You know, nothing too crazy, but so I see the sun pops. It's like ocean music. Yeah. Yeah.

4 (45m 55s):
The music that I expect to hear about like a documentary on whales.

3 (45m 59s):
Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of a Brian Eno influenced type of vibe.

4 (46m 4s):
Are you doing a video whenever you feel like it? Are you doing them on a schedule?

3 (46m 9s):
I kind of just am always shooting stuff and then I'll edit. And sometimes I'll the first, the first, the first month I didn't post as much because honestly I was just trying to figure out how to survive out there. And now I've got a good system. I saw, I think the videos are gonna start coming a little more fast and furious now. Cause

4 (46m 26s):
Was there a moment where you were like, what the fuck am I doing? I need to go back to LA every day,

3 (46m 33s):
Every day, every single day I get up. I say that for real. And I'm not even joking every day I got up and go, what the fuck am I doing? But you keep going. Yeah. Cause I have, I have some, I have some things on the agenda that I want to accomplish in the next month in Texas when I leave here. First of all, I don't know where I'm sleeping tonight. Okay. I don't know where I'm going tonight, but I'm, I'm I'm I have a few little interesting tricks for that too. But if I ever get stuck in a bind right. And been driving and I haven't found a nice place like that, I'll go to just a straight up truck stop. And I'll wedge in between a bunch of 18 wheelers crash, get up in the morning and you know, start finding my destination.

3 (47m 14s):
What I've been finding is I get on these sort of this sort of pattern where I'll go a couple of days where I don't find a place like that. You know, that's like, but every three or four days I'll find a place kind of at that level of beauty. And then once I'm there, I'll stay there for four or five days and just really get into it. I'll shoot a lot of video I'll edit and I'll create some music and I'll create some things. And then when I get back to cell service, I'll post and then I go look for the next spot. So my agenda, when I leave here today is I want to go around Texas and go find some ghost towns and ghost towns, lots of ghost towns in Texas, lots of there's, apparently there's a 500 of them, you know, a hundred ghost towns back in silver mining and gold mining days when they built the railroads.

3 (48m 6s):
First of all, the silver would dry up. The town would dry up. So there's these towns that are just, you know, dilapidated, broken downtowns in the middle of that. Didn't Kim Basinger buy one of those.

4 (48m 17s):
She did. She did right in Georgia. Right? I think so. Yeah. Yeah. And I won, she must been losing her marbles. Like why don't you buy a ghost town?

3 (48m 25s):
Yeah, I don't, I don't know. But you know, there's a real sort of beauty to it because, so there's two things I've been doing that I've found I really enjoy. And there are new things. So I can't speak to them like with total detail, but you know, next time I talk to you, I'm gonna have a lot more information about this. The other thing is native ruins of like, like there's, there was unbelievable amount of native American ruins out there in the desert, in New Mexico. In the reason I was in the, in the Heela national forest, I went to the, the cliff dwellings that were built by Anasazi. Those Staci is in Colorado and this, but it looks just like, it's exactly like that.

3 (49m 8s):
And so there's the, the Mughal and Indians, they were called in at 1280. And so that video is, that was a clip of that 1280. Yeah. There's a clip of that in the Arizona one. There's a clip of that. And these are like, first of all, very remote. That was right. Actually where we saw the half Alina was right after I went there, there are 50 rooms in this thing built out of stone up on a cliff. They've created an so, but it was built in 1280 and then not discovered by the now the park ranger told me this last week.

3 (49m 49s):
Yeah, right here. Wow. That's just sitting there. Not discovered, not discovered until 1874. Holy shit. Right. 1874. And so they discovered this and it wasn't until a few years later that Roosevelt theater was built, made it a national monument. So in the period between 1874 and I think 1907, it got looted a bit when they found it, it was full of pottery. It was full of all this artifacts and stuff that got loaded. That's gone. But there's some things in there that were really interesting that they did discover, like they discovered Macoff feather. This is, this is pretty beautiful places while

4 (50m 25s):
Yeah. And you you're, this is all drone footage, right. This is me shooting with my handheld camera. So you're allowed to walk around up there. Yeah.

3 (50m 33s):
So they have a nice, it's really set up nice. It's a, there's a, you drive in on a nice paved road. And then there's a national park specific state park or national park is the healer national forest facility there, national park facility, I believe. But, and there's some, some Rangers there and some, some people with knowledge of the history and then they have a nice maintained path that walks up. So we know

4 (51m 3s):
Where their people up. They're looking at it with you. There

3 (51m 6s):
Was on that day, I saw the sun was kind of going down there and there were two other people, that's it? And they walked up ahead. I mean, yeah. National money,

4 (51m 14s):
Hewlett cliff, cliff dwellings, and the healer wilderness, the healer wilderness is where they have some of the best elk hunting in the world. Yeah,

3 (51m 20s):
Yeah. Yeah. There was a lot of hunters out and, and I saw some ELCA assessment. Yeah. You hear him screaming? I didn't, I did not. But, but that's, they, they were the thing that I noticed about the elk, which was just the one time I saw them was they were, I was driving. So I was driving a very remote sort of, I'm not going, I'm not, I'm not taking any interstates. I never take an interstate all the way from LA a hallway to here. I maybe it was on the 10 for like maybe a couple of miles just to get from one highway to another. So you take the smaller highways and then you see like these towns, these places that, you know, went away when the railway was built somewhere else or the, when they put the interstate somewhere else, the town dried up.

3 (52m 9s):
And then there's these towns that are just kind of half alive and fledgling towns. And there's just a real beauty there to it. Right. So, you know, from a photography standpoint, you know, like there's a lot of nice architecture and things that is just really interesting. So, but

4 (52m 24s):
So you consciously made a decision in the beginning of this journey to not take any interstate.

3 (52m 28s):
Yeah. Yeah. Cause I wanna, I want to go find these places that are off the beaten track and, and, and, and photograph them really. But, so I was coming around the corner and there was a herd of elk and they were sort of in the distance and they were running like playing with each other. I've ever seen that, like there was one was running and then they were running around, it was this Oh, like seven days ago or something.

4 (52m 54s):
So it wouldn't be the rut. The rut is in September. Yeah. They were running sometimes they late rot in October. Yeah.

3 (53m 2s):
So w one was one was running and I thought they were horses for sure. Cause I just thought, well, I've never seen it live. Then it was fast, really fast, like across, it was a sort of farmer's field and they were playing with each other. Yeah. And then I, then the car pulled up, I pulled up my car and they hit my ULI stopped and looked at me and walked off into the woods. But, but yeah, it was, it's a, it's, it's beautiful out there, man. But yeah, ghost towns, that's, that's where I'm going after this, I'm going to go try to find some ghost towns and, and photograph those. And, and I'm writing, you know, I, I, I write in the van, I'm working on things that I working on, you know, you know, I'm not just completely off the grid. I mean, I'm writing an animated series right now that I'm sort of working on. So I got on my computer or sometimes animated series.

3 (53m 45s):
Yeah. There's this, I am working with this great company out of Ottawa. My hometown called mercury film works and they're, they actually animate Mickey mouse and all sorts of stuff for Disney, the big, big animated company. And so I'm writing a, a fun show about a crazy kid who likes pulling pranks and, and, you know, and so by you, yes, it's called little Tommy green called how on the nose is that it's like a Dennis, the menace, you know, but he goes out and doing impulse pranks on his parents and does a lot of the kinds of things I did. So, but, but, you know, so I'm writing that and, and just kinda, you know, it's interesting, I've found that like, I can kind of do everything that I would do at home in the van, you know, with this electrical system, you know?

3 (54m 32s):
So it's pretty, pretty neat. Yeah.

0 (54m 34s):
You seem like you're in a good place. Like it's seems like it's been tricky, but you, I mean, I'm getting the impression that you're really enjoying this. I am. Yeah. Is this going to extend, how long are you going to do this for,

3 (54m 49s):
This is, this has been a, this is a very good question. This is your new life. It's possible. Really. I'm not selling my house or anything. I'm going to, I think what I'll do is, I mean, I bought the van it's, I didn't rent it for a quick one-off trip, you know, and, and, and I've put a lot of time into it and I am enjoying it. And you know, one thing is I've always loved photography. I'm bringing a Leica film camera as well. So I'm shooting a lot of still photography as well. And it's nice to have something to take a picture of, you know, it's nice to go somewhere. Interesting. So I'm enjoying that. But I think that, I think that what I'll probably do is, you know, when life gets back to normal, whenever the fuck that is right, what is normal anymore?

3 (55m 33s):
Yeah. Part of my plan is to, you know, when I start touring again, doing standup again, I think I might take a few less airplanes in, in the future and be in the van a little bit more. Yeah.

0 (55m 46s):
So like, say if you have a gig, if you decided to stand up in Utah, you might drive there.

3 (55m 49s):
I'm thinking I might start to talk to, you know, the way I book it about sort of doing more of a road trip type run of like in a straight line, it's supposed to go home and you know, to Seattle this week and in Boston next week, right. We have to do East coast run or do, yeah. That's smart. So, so I'm thinking that it might be something that I do. I mean, I, I, I, I'm not, I'm not moving into my van full time, but I definitely do

0 (56m 12s):
Do let her move in that direction. It seems like,

3 (56m 14s):
Look, I, it's interesting what you say I believe is true because there's a little more cost getting their phone, by the way. This is the way I make coffee too. I make coffee with this thing. This is not an endorsement or anything, but it's pretty cool products called a Jetboil. Yeah. And he just, yeah, those are great. Yeah. They're great for hunting. Yeah. So, cause I don't want to use my battery. So I boil up my water and then I make my coffee and then I pour it into a thermos of coffee all day in the hot tub.

0 (56m 46s):
It's amazing that it stays hot. So I was thinking about that in technology,

3 (56m 50s):
Thinking about that exact thing I'm going to is the technol has thermos technology changed? Oh yeah. Since in Canada I was a kid. You'd take a thermos to hockey. Cause we play outside on outdoor rinks and you'd bring a thermos of hot chocolate. Yeah.

0 (57m 5s):
Yeah. Well, when I was a kid, we used to ice fish and we used to bring hot coffee out onto the Lake. Yeah.

3 (57m 11s):
It's,

0 (57m 12s):
It's fun. It's not as fun as regular fishing, but when you're living in a place like Boston.

3 (57m 17s):
Yeah. Were you in the, in the hut? On the no. Yeah. What were you fishing for? Pike or

0 (57m 23s):
Trout? Easily trapped. Yeah. Pike too though. Yeah. Pike are pretty active in cold weather these days. I do what I can when I can. Yeah. Just unfortunately, ever since I moved to Austin, it's been kind of playing catch up and getting everything set up and you know, just, I'm still not totally moved. I mean, I moved in, but I'm not totally settled in, but I'm pretty close. Yeah.

3 (57m 45s):
I didn't catch much trout, grownup, mostly large mouth bass and pike was where I would, what I would fish for. But, but yeah, thermos technology. I don't know if it's changed, but it's amazing.

0 (57m 56s):
Oh yeah. Yeti flipped the fucking game on its head. Really? Yeah. Yeti coolers are amazing. I have a Yeti cooler that I take when I hunt and you can put ice in that Yeti cooler in the summer and seven days later you'll have ice. It's bananas. They're crazy. I, I, I took a video that I put on my Instagram of, we shot deer in Hawaii, shot axes, deer in Hawaii, put the, you know, the, they put the thing in the cargo that you seal up though, Yeti and got it all the way back to LA left it outside overnight. Then the next day at noon, I opened it up and it was filled with ice. Like I'm to like rock solid ice. Okay. It's crazy. How good those things.

0 (58m 36s):
That's better installation.

3 (58m 37s):
It's better than I just have a regular thermos for my coffee, but that's pretty amazing. Yeah. I dunno. I dunno how cooler

0 (58m 43s):
Those are way better. The thermoses are better. Those, you know, Yeti makes those tumblers, they'll keep your coffee hot. Like literally all day. I don't know what they're doing some voodoo, but it's fucking amazing.

3 (58m 54s):
I loved in the, I love the, the sock foot walk in when you did the, when you were with

0 (59m 1s):
Steve. Oh yeah. When you're sneaking up on deer, you got to take your shoes off. You've done before. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. My friend Remy Warren calls it an SOS, a shoes off situation. Like when you're, when you're closing in on particularly on mule deer, you know, deer are very sensitive to predators. Elk are not nearly as sensitive elk here. A lot of noise. The elk are a big animal and you know, they're worried about mountain lions and bears and stuff like that. But you know, they're, they're a little less worried than the smaller animals are. So mule deer are particularly worried to they're very jumpy. They're always like, like, listen, I on their ears are twisting. And if you snap a branch, they'll, they'll pop up and start running.

0 (59m 43s):
Was that

3 (59m 44s):
Obviously that was a fun day with you and Steve out there. But like, what was, was that must've been, that was in Nevada was,

0 (59m 50s):
Yeah, that was in the Nevada high country. We're hunting mule deer. We struck out, but I got real close. A couple of times to deer just didn't really get a shot. Did you,

3 (59m 59s):
Is it kinda, sorta nice sometimes when they get away? I mean like,

0 (1h 0m 4s):
Because, well, it's a luxury because I'm living in a first-world country and I have access to food and I'm not starving. And you know, so it's a, it's a luxury that I can enjoy the fact that they got away. Cause this is

3 (1h 0m 17s):
Something that I've been grappling with a little bit, because like I said, I'm not a Hunter or haven't, but, but now I am hunting, but I haven't actually seen anything. So I'm just looking, I'm just saying, when I'm saying I'm hunting, I'm just, I'm looking for something you're looking for birds. And in my mind I'm thinking, okay, gross or quail. I could probably, you know, wrap my head around shooting. Yeah. Because first of all, you know, I'm eating raw onions and canned beans out there. I'm not cooking onions, but yeah, that would be pretty tasty, you know? And I chicken out there, you know, and then I saw wild chicken, but the thing is, is I also kind of know, I'm never going to find one because I don't know what I'm doing. Right. So like, and I don't have to, I think you really need dogs that are trained to rails the birds out.

0 (1h 1m 0s):
Not necessarily, no, you, you, you, there's a lot of birds that you can get if you just swipe

3 (1h 1m 6s):
Some research. Okay. So I went to, I went to a, this was a top of a mountain where it was this, this was on the road for a while, but it was, you know, the, I know the, the, the dusk, the dusty gross is native to the certain elevation in the way Saatchi plateau. That's where I was the <inaudible> plateau in Utah. And I went up there. I don't think that's how you say it wa Wasatch or yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I just, I just, I just read the sign when I drove up the road. I know country though. Oh my God. Yeah. And they were in the aspens. And so, you know, I walked up, but there was a moment where I was walking through the aspens, looking for the, the dusty gross and you know, didn't see one.

3 (1h 1m 57s):
And then there were three beautiful deer standing there. Like as far as Jamie away looking at me, I'm standing there with my shotgun, looking at him. I'm just like, I don't know what I do with you guys, but I am pretty hungry right now, but I'll let you guys let you guys go. And then people looking for my bird. But, but, so I don't know. I don't know that I would ever have even really want to shoot a mammal

0 (1h 2m 20s):
A mammal for some reason. Yeah. I don't know if you eat them. Yeah,

5 (1h 2m 24s):
No, I know. And I've, I've heard you talk about this and I agree with it too, but, but, but, but I just don't know if I'd be able to do it. I don't know.

0 (1h 2m 30s):
You would definitely be able to do it if you had to for food. Yeah. And I'm sure you would develop a different sort of relationship with the animal. You would think that you're, you're very appreciative of them, but you'll, you'll develop this real predator, prey relationship with animals. If you need to survive, you know, I've talked about this many times, but unfortunately I'm gonna talk about it again. There's a fantastic series that vice guide to travel did back in the day. It's quite a few years old, at least eight years old. I think it's called Hine. Moe's Arctic adventure. And it's a guy. I think his name is <inaudible> couth.

0 (1h 3m 12s):
I think that's his last name. And he lives up in the middle of nowhere in Alaska. And he actually has a license to be in this particular area or a permit to be in this particular area that no one else can ever have a house in there. Again, he's like grandfathered in. Yeah. And all this guy does is go out and subsistence hunt. So he goes out and hunts, caribou. He goes out and he fishes and that's all he does. That's his whole life. And this guy has this incredible connection to, to life and to, to his food. And, but he's also very articulate intelligent, man. So when he talks about it, he's able to talk about it in a way, this is the guy right here.

0 (1h 3m 56s):
Wow. So he's got all of his food and it's frozen. So that's his cabin. That's where he lives. And he's been out there since I think since the seventies man and had a super fun. Yeah. I think so super fucking healthy and really robust. This guy didn't find out about nine 11 until quite a while afterwards. And I think he found out from a photograph, Oh my gosh. Yeah. And he lives up there.

5 (1h 4m 23s):
It's like one of those, his wife, Japanese soldiers, they found in the woods

0 (1h 4m 27s):
Sort of the sixties. Right, right. It's still the, the war was going on. But this guy, he's got a really interesting way of describing what he thinks is great about this life. Wow.

5 (1h 4m 40s):
Wait, what's where do I find this? This is

0 (1h 4m 42s):
A vice guy to travel. Yeah. There it is. Surviving alone, Alaska. Hi mom. Hi Mo H E I M O Corp. That's how you say it's K O R T H.

5 (1h 4m 54s):
Wow. Yeah. I watched that show alone actually, which I loved if you ever watched that show. That show was amazing. So I kinda was, that was something I was getting in my head. And there w I don't know if it's the latest season, but the one guy who got the moose and yeah.

0 (1h 5m 6s):
Jordan Jonas, right. That's not his name. That's the guy who's been on the podcast.

5 (1h 5m 10s):
Yeah. And he like made a fishing net out of roll Panos. Yeah. It was incredible. But no, it's just something, something about it, for sure.

3 (1h 5m 18s):
But, so, yeah. Yeah. It's and by the way, like, first of all, I, I, I believe I said, congratulations already. Off-camera but how cool is this, man? Thank you. Congratulations, buddy. I, you know, I'm super, I, it doesn't make sense to say proud of you because I mean, what the fuck does that mean? But you know, like I am though. I mean, like, I just, I think it's so cool. I sent you a text right after the, after you announced your Spotify deal. And I was just thinking like, nobody has ever done that before. You know, like, like in the history of all broadcasting, you know, I said, you know, Johnny Carson was the guy who we all looked up to back in the day, had everybody watching him, it was a different world.

3 (1h 5m 60s):
Television was, you know, three networks. Everybody watched Johnny. He was a guy who became this very successful person off of traditional media. But to do what you've done is just so incredible. And I just, congratulations now, it's definitely something that, you know, I, I, you know, we've talked about this before, but I always thought, man, you could do that. You could do that. You could be the biggest show and not be on network TV. I always believe that. And thank you for, for, for, for proving it because it's like, it's so cool. And I love the studio by the way.

0 (1h 6m 40s):
Well, thank you for being a pioneer man, because you,

3 (1h 6m 43s):
I mean, I'm a real pioneer now in living in a log chopping wood for, for dinner,

0 (1h 6m 48s):
But you were a pioneer of this cause you gave me the seeds of the earliest ideas about doing a podcast. One

3 (1h 6m 54s):
You've been very kind with, with when you've said these things to me over the years and last time. But, but you know what I, what I find amazing about it that I never was able to figure out I was into the technology and I left. I was never really able to figure out what is so amazing. What I've watched you figure out is you've really made a show that really captures the interest of people, you know, a lot huge population of people love what you guys talk about on the show. And that's, what's, what's really cool. You know, you know, just, just, I mean, how did you determine that? Like, you know, I, I just watched your interview with Kanye. I just watched your interview with Alex Jones and I'm J I'm just seeing all these subjects that I see swirling around and I'm going well, that's the kind of stuff that like, when I go down a rabbit hole on the internet, like I want to, I want to, you know, learn about these things.

3 (1h 7m 47s):
Was there a moment where you realized, Oh wait, like if I talk about, you know, X, Y, or Z, that's really capturing people's attention or was it

0 (1h 7m 57s):
No, just what you were interested in. Never for a second. Never for a second. Have I said, this is going to capture people's interest. Never everything has been like, Ooh, I want to talk to that guy. Oh, that guy said he was in a Navy air, a Navy jet. And he was tracking a UFO commander. David Fravor. Ooh. I want to talk to

4 (1h 8m 16s):
Him. Yeah. Oh, Bob Lozar said he worked on alien technology in area S for, Oh, I want to talk to him. Oh, this guy said he saw Bigfoot. Or that guy says, he's working on life extension and figuring out how to lengthen your telomeres, or this guy knows how to, you know, whatever it is, whatever they're, they're figuring out the age of the universe or people are just, you know, people that are writing books or people that are, you know, former military people or people that are whatever they are. If I find them interesting. I like people. I'm a big fan of people. I like talking to all kinds of different people. I like the way their brain thinks I like comparing the way people's brain things. I like, I like sorta like, just seeing how they view the world, because the way you view the world is the way you personally view the world.

4 (1h 9m 4s):
But it's very much influenced by the things that you've found attractive about the way the other people that you've run into, see things like we are not individuals in the sense that we're autonomous completely alone without any influence whatsoever from the outside world. We are, we have multi influences. We're constantly being influenced by our invite. That's why you're in, where you live is so important. And in one of the things that I've found in moving from LA to Austin

0 (1h 9m 32s):
Is that where you live,

4 (1h 9m 34s):
It makes a big impact on the amount of stress you have in how you feel. I feel so much better

0 (1h 9m 40s):
Here just right away,

4 (1h 9m 43s):
Disconnected from Hollywood disconnected from traditional forms of show business. But also the people here, the people here are different. They're more relaxed. They're regular people. Yeah. Chappelle and I were having a conversation about this last night. And he was like, we were talking about how, like, people here in Austin, they're real people. They're not people that are trying to get famous. And people that are trying to, you know, get on television shows and do movies and this weirdness to that life. And some of the people that do that are really cool. Like it's, it's rare and nice when you run into a guy like Chris Pratt, who is a super famous guy, he's in the movies, but could not be more genuine.

4 (1h 10m 25s):
Genuine could not be more down to earth. Could not be more normal and friendly. Super great guy just happens to be a big movie star, but that's rare. Most of the people that want that life, they're all kind of wacky and fucked up. And you, you you're in their world with their energy. And they infect all the people around them. They infect people that are in the service industry, managers, agents. This is fucking hive

0 (1h 10m 50s):
Of weirdness out here. There's none of that. There's none of that. And almost immediately,

4 (1h 10m 56s):
I felt a lowering

0 (1h 10m 57s):
Of stress level almost immediately. And then

4 (1h 11m 0s):
People that you deal with, like, whether it's someone who's working at the counter at Walgreens or a restaurant, they're so nice. They're so friendly.

0 (1h 11m 9s):
And so, because early on in your show, you had the confidence

3 (1h 11m 14s):
To just do your own thing, right? You, you created your own thing. You didn't have, you know, these sort of tentacles coming down telling you, Oh, you can't interview that person that let that allowed you to just talk to the people that you found. Interesting. And you happened to be interested in interesting shit

0 (1h 11m 30s):
In the beginning. Nobody wanted anything to do with it. That's, what's hilarious. Like my agent in the beginning didn't want to have anything to do with this podcast. Then what they were like, what are you wasting your time? Like, because back then, like 2000 people were watching or listening, it was nobody's posting.

3 (1h 11m 46s):
Yeah. I remember what mine, I was trying to tell people, this is going to be the thing. Yeah.

0 (1h 11m 49s):
I know. They're like, get the fuck outta here. We're busy with movies, kid. They were busy. Yeah. So luckily in the beginning, when I maybe could have used a little help getting guests or doing things or getting advertisement or something like that, they didn't get involved. Because if somebody got involved, they would have definitely told me to not do things that have turned out to be very successful. Like I'm sure there were told me to not interview controversial people or not interview people that you're, you know, you're going to get critics criticized for specific topics or, you know, specific people that are writing books that may ruffle a bunch of people's feathers. And I want to know what they think. I want to know why they think the way they think I want to ask them questions. And there's a lot of people that don't think you should do that.

0 (1h 12m 31s):
And you know, and they'll, they'll be the gatekeepers to your, the information information that you take in and the conversations that you have and you distribute, and it's not good. This that's not like if you talked to someone and it was a mistake. Well now, you know, but at least, you know, you talk to them. If someone tells you it's a mistake to talk to someone, but you want to talk to them and then you start thinking, Oh, let me run it by Mike and the team. And then the team of those sit around and think about their mortgage. They sit around and think about whether or not you could get in trouble. And that could, that could eventually lead to them, having a decrease in their income. And then they start to fucking play it safe.

0 (1h 13m 11s):
Yeah. I've seen that, man. I've seen that with stand-ups. I've seen that with people. Like there's people that, you know, they have podcasts and they have a bunch of people that are there at the studio telling them, talk about different things, telling them to pick different subjects, telling them let's move on. Like, I've seen that I've seen in the middle of a podcast, someone say, let's, let's move on. You guys are on this subject. Let's move on. Who the fuck are you? Let's move on. Some, some guy standing on the outside that gets some sneaky paycheck that he doesn't really deserve is now saying, let's move on, holding a clipboard as if it like, like, what are you doing? Get the fuck out of here.

0 (1h 13m 51s):
It's two people talking. And if they decide to move on, they'll move on. But people that like, bring up this, bring up that like, bring up this. Who are you? Why are you here? But that's what they do. I don't know if you've ever gone to, like I went to, I did. What's that guy's name? The, the sports guy, bill Simmons. I did his show on HBO. He's a great guy, really interesting guy. And I love the way he does his podcast, but I did his HBO show dude. And you're surrounded by people. It's me and him sitting in the booth, just like this, but there's fucking people there. And there's people there and there's people walking around the set it's distracting. And there's people standing around, they got notes and clipboards and his camera people everywhere.

0 (1h 14m 33s):
You're like, what? This is not necessary. Yeah. You have a hundred people here or 20, you have 20 people here. You need one, you need one.

3 (1h 14m 43s):
And then managing all of those people becomes a bigger priority than actually the content.

0 (1h 14m 48s):
Then you have interoffice politics take place. You have relationships with people. I mean, even me, not, not even, I don't mean relationships. Like boy, girl, boy, boy, girl, girl. I mean like boss, friends and yeah. And then weirdness.

5 (1h 15m 1s):
And he goes, and he goes, yeah,

3 (1h 15m 3s):
Got ego. And then an old, they, then they are mad at the talent because the talent is getting more attention than that. It's everyone's yeah, no one would have,

0 (1h 15m 11s):
Let me do this show. There was never, yeah. No one would have ever let me. Yeah. And it's not by design that I did it this way. It's not like I see what they don't see and I'm going to do this. It's like, I didn't want to listen, like get out of here, fuck off. Do what I want to do.

3 (1h 15m 26s):
You had that confidence in and just great up sort of just sort of, you didn't give a fuck and you just did it. Where do you think

0 (1h 15m 36s):
Fear factor money. Right. That helped a little bit of fear factor money in the bank where I'm like, if this shit completely hits the fan, you know, I can just sort of live off of that. Yeah. Yeah. And also, I don't, I've never been very good with the whole boss. Someone telling you what to do. If I did that, if I was good with that, I would never become a standup. I've never done most of the things that I've done and I certainly would have no, no, thank you. I'm good. I certainly, would've never been able to do the podcast this way. If I brought people board and there was a certain point in time where people were talking about it before the show that people did want to come on board. And then I started getting offers. I've had offers where people wanted to buy half the podcast and yeah, like pretty generous amounts of money.

0 (1h 16m 21s):
And I was like, this is not, I don't think this is wise. This is not wise to get weird. Spotify was the first offer where they came around. They said, we don't want you to do anything different. We just want a license to show,

3 (1h 16m 32s):
Decide what you're going to ask people. You just go on with the flow, do research on stuff. Cause I, I, I really loved some of the questions you asked Kanye, trying to remember what they were, but I mean, do you sort of plan in advance or are you kinda just sorta cause,

0 (1h 16m 46s):
Well, with Kanye, we had talked about doing a podcast for a long time, but I was worried that he was going to come off.

3 (1h 16m 52s):
I remember your first question was, why do you want to do this? Right.

5 (1h 16m 55s):
I just was when he was running for president, I thought was such a

3 (1h 16m 57s):
Great question. Cause it's like, you know, why do you want to run for office?

5 (1h 17m 2s):
Everybody would ask that question. But it was just, it was just right into it. It was just great. You know,

0 (1h 17m 6s):
A fan of his music, I've always been a fan of his music. And I think that the, the way he communicates his sort of manic style of thinking and constantly creating and doing things, it's why he's so successful. I mean, that's the, there's this like stream of consciousness that he has is also why he's so prolific as an artist. Like, I mean, he is, all of his albums are good. He doesn't have a dud. You know, you go from one album to the next and they're all like he's got this dream of creative ideas that are constantly running through his head. And he talks sometimes in these streams where they don't end, he goes from one subject to the next subject. And so I was curious as to like how I was gonna talk to him.

0 (1h 17m 49s):
And I wanted to make sure that we can do it in a way where other people are going to appreciate. There's a great value in the way he thinks. And then if you get it in soundbites or you get it in some weird thing where he says something and people get mad at him and they blew him or something like that, like you're missing who he really is, who he really is, is him all day. It's not him in this 32nd chunk where you don't like what he said, guess what? He probably doesn't like what he said either. Okay, he's fucking streaming. He's just going, he's running with these thoughts and ideas, but that's also why he can boil those thoughts and ideas down these amazing fucking songs. You know, like this is, that's what I wanted to get out of him while we were talking.

0 (1h 18m 32s):
Because when people were trying to medicate him and people were trying to, and I'm like, I don't, I don't. I, if you have a choice between this medicated, overweight, Kanye who doesn't get anything done or manic crazy Kanye, he says, wild shit. You want manic? Crazy. Kanye is manic. Crazy. Kanye is the one who makes amazing music and I've been around him. He's a nice guy, man. He's a really genuinely nice guy. And when the cameras are off, same things, nice guy with all the staff and everybody he's cool. Like he's genuinely cool, but whatever you want to call mental illness, that's the problem. It's like when you call it mental illness, well, we'll, you got to give it medicine.

0 (1h 19m 12s):
He's got mental illness. You've got to give him medicine. Do you really? Because that mental illness is making some pretty amazing shit, right? Like, look at us, fucking look at us catalog. Look at all the music he's made. That's all because of mental illness. No, that whatever you call an illness is a particular style of thinking that he has that sort of non-linear and it's, it's wild and it's all over the place. But it's also very,

3 (1h 19m 36s):
I've found in that interview though, that, you know, I've seen him interviewed quite a bit, but that was, that was one where everything you said made a lot of sense. He's certainly done a lot of put a lot of thought into a lot of the stuff he was talking about with everything from, you know, reorganizing the way civilization works. I mean, I just, I, it takes a little bit of thinking. It takes a little bit of thinking to come up with how to reorganize the entire way civilization works.

0 (1h 19m 60s):
But that was one of the things that I thought was really good about the interviews. You do get a chance to see, like, this is not just a crazy person, buys his own bullshit. And by the way, when he's like the braggy stuff that he kind of does talks to himself, first of all, he's being honest about where he is. He's sort of reaffirming who he is, but also he jokes around, like he was joking around about it outside. He was showing us this video that he had made for his wife if for his wife's birthday. And it was really emotional. It was very beautiful because he, he made a, a hologram of her dad and he wrote the script for all this. Oh, he did. Yeah. And he wrote the script for all the things that the hall was telling him, her it's, it's really intense.

0 (1h 20m 44s):
And you know, you can do that now. Like you can take your voice and for you, and I would be easy for them to do because there's hours and hours and hours of us talking. So they would take this voice. God, imagine what they could do. They already have they've. They used me as an example for one of these companies in Canada, they used me as an example for how well this deep fake technology works because there's 1500 fucking plus podcasts in me that are three hours long. So he'd take these, these sounds that come out of my mouth and then you can make me say anything, literally anything, cause every noise that I'm capable of making I've made. Right? So you use this catalog of sounds that my voice can make.

0 (1h 21m 29s):
And that's what he also did without hologram. Yeah. Because you know, Robert Kardashian, there's all the cases and all the different times he's been interviewed on television. There's a great catalog of his voice and you can have him speak to her. Yeah. But even in then, like he, he has him say that, you know, in your genius, genius husband, but he was laughing when he said it and showed it to us. He was laughing. He thought it was funny that he S he had them, he had Robert Kardashians call him a genius, amazing genius husband. Like he thought it was funny. Like, he's not just, it's not just ego. It's not just crazy. It's also there's brilliance there.

0 (1h 22m 9s):
He's a complicated person. It's nice to hear that because like, you know, it's interesting. I don't know how the media can sort of reframe a person. Right. And nuance. Yeah. People are nuanced. Man. People are really complicated. You decide to decide that a person is this person because of one sentence, they said one time, or because of one thing that they did where they maybe wish they didn't, or because of one concert they did where people booed them or whatever, whatever you pick about Kanye that people decide, he's this. People just love to put someone in a box and categorize them and just decide that they want to dismiss them. And this is the problem with cancel culture, right?

0 (1h 22m 51s):
It's like we have this idea of, of, of things where we want to boil them down to almost a tweet. You know, things that are like enormously complicated. A man who's lived 40 plus of his life. And in that life has experienced heartbreak and sorrow and success and failure and friendship and betrayal and all these different things. And all the, the, the, the creative passions that you've poured out into your work. And they want to just boil you down to a sentence or two. And it's crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy for the person doing that and trying to boil someone down.

0 (1h 23m 31s):
It's crazy for people to read it and accept it. It's, it's so negative. It's one of the most negative things about social media is that we want to categorize someone by individual tweets or individual statements, or people are fucking immensely, complex, immensely complex. And to deny that, to deny that is it's, it's very disingenuous. It's dishonest. It's bad for our understanding of us. It's bad for our, our understanding of who we are personally as a human. When, when someone decides to define you based on a sentence or call you they'll Tom green is just a bump, a bump bump, and then you read it and you're like, Oh shit, I am fucked.

0 (1h 24m 15s):
Like we were talking about customer to believe it. But that's when the comments are negative. You know, when you reading comments, reading one, person's typed out thing. That's negative about you. And you're saying like, Oh, I can't help myself. Like, Oh yeah, that, that is all up. There's a real issue with the way human beings are taking in other people's opinions. It's not that there's anything wrong with taking in people's opinions, but people's opinions are supposed to be shared like this, like you and I are sharing opinions. Like you tell me something and I tell you something. And I say, did you mean this? And you're like, no, no, no. I meant that. And you're like, Oh, okay. Also you think that? And you're like, yeah. And then we're like, Oh, then we get each other.

0 (1h 24m 56s):
We're talking. But it's an exchange. It's very rare that you can just nail something with a sentence or two.

5 (1h 25m 4s):
And also there's not, you're not limited by time. As in normal television, there is whole, we've got seven minutes before the commercial break. So we've got to get to this and this and this. And then you never really ended up talking about anything.

0 (1h 25m 13s):
That's been the bit, the best part about podcasting without a boss is that no one has ever told me, like, it has to be 45 minutes long. It has to be in here and let's edit out the parts that weren't as good. Let's chop this up and make that like, Oh, why, yeah. Why

5 (1h 25m 31s):
Are you going to go back to LA tall? Or, you know,

0 (1h 25m 35s):
I'm going to fly over it in a plane when it's on fire at the comedy store. When Gavin Newsome donate, he, when he detonates the, the nuclear weapon that he has under his

5 (1h 25m 46s):
Desk, what about standup? Cause they decide that they're gonna kick him out of office. Comedy's going to have a suicide vest on. Yeah, I do miss the comedy store, but the comedy store is not the comedy store anymore. It's not open. Right. But when it opens up again, you're going to,

0 (1h 25m 59s):
If what's, if is the word LA is on a 10:00 PM curfew, you know why? Cause COVID has a Betty by time. COVID after 10:00 PM, it comes out and it attacks people we're poor 10:00 PM. But we got back

3 (1h 26m 12s):
Right? When the vaccine next year, it'll open up again.

0 (1h 26m 14s):
Why, why 10:00 PM. That's so arbitrary. You tell me you can't catch Colby between six and 10. Like there's going to be some sort of a, a thing that happens after 10 people are vulnerable, more vulnerable, get drunk and put your guard down. It's nonsense, man. It's nonsense. These fucking assholes are imposing rules on people that closed their businesses down. He's still trying to reseller. You want to drink? Sure. That's what you want. Okay. I'll have one. All right. Am I getting nervous? All this crazy talk of COVID. No,

3 (1h 26m 39s):
You just mentioned alcohol and I thought, Hey, you still drinking on the show?

0 (1h 26m 41s):
Yeah. We can have some sort of Jamie Cole. Let's get us some whiskey, some Texas whiskey and some glasses, no ice. We're going like men today. No ice.

3 (1h 26m 50s):
Okay. What kind of whiskey? You're drinking here in Texas. Yeah.

6 (1h 26m 54s):
Yeah. Do you have a favorite? I've been drinking. Bushmills

0 (1h 26m 58s):
That's good stuff. I like Buffalo trace. Oh yeah. We had that license. It's a sponsor. And they've been around since before America started. Ah, okay. They've been around since 1773. I see. It's really good. They won like whiskey maker of the year. 2020. Yeah.

3 (1h 27m 13s):
Smells is my grandfather's Irish heritage, you know, Northern, Northern Ireland. So you know,

0 (1h 27m 20s):
My friend, Josh Barnett has a great whiskey as well. Goddammit. And I'll have a bottle here trying to remember the name of it. It's like war master. It's like a smokey whiskey. It's very good. He brought it last time. He was on the podcast. Yeah.

3 (1h 27m 32s):
I drink. I drink in scotch too. Balvenie scotch. I like getting hammered out there in the woods, by herself in the woods. I don't have the Balvenie and the bloods I bring meaning I've got a lot of mini bottles, like airplane bottles. Oh, set up fridge full of those. Do you? Yeah. Why

0 (1h 27m 48s):
Don't you just have a big bottle and class? You

3 (1h 27m 50s):
Open it, you know, you don't really want to open a bottle of booze in your van when driving around. So you just drink them one at a time and then you grab an open container. And that's my idea.

0 (1h 27m 59s):
Oh, that's right. Like you can't have an open container in a car. Exactly. What the deal.

3 (1h 28m 3s):
Yeah, exactly. So I just got a bunch of little ones that drinks quite smart, sir. So was a healthy, poor and my friends. Yeah,

0 (1h 28m 9s):
My brother. Thank you. Come on man. We're in Texas. Yeah. This is a still Austin straight bourbon whiskey. Local stuff. Oh, legit. Right. Very nice. Yeah. Very good. Woo bourbon. That's this? I don't drink a lot of corn. Right? Bourbons corn. Yeah. I don't drink alone. So don't know. Hmm. No, I'm a social drinker. I don't think I ever genuinely, I guess, but yeah. I smoke weed alone though. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. But I like to do that before I, right. Yeah. Yeah. I heard Carlin talk about that.

3 (1h 28m 46s):
I mean, red or something that you talked about, how he,

0 (1h 28m 51s):
Let me get this right. I got it. He wrote first and then he would write to punch Polish. Yeah.

3 (1h 28m 57s):
When he would drink and when he would, he would drink when he was coming up with ideas and then he would Polish it up with some weed. I think

5 (1h 29m 3s):
It was the other way around, but yeah,

0 (1h 29m 4s):
Definitely would punch it up with, with pot. He said he would smoke pot and then punch up the

5 (1h 29m 10s):
Material. It's interesting. Like how are you supposed to write totally straight. You know, I write in the morning a lot. Yeah. Totally straight. Right. Cause you're kinda got that energy, but I got it. Yeah.

0 (1h 29m 20s):
A lot of times they're just, it's just a scaffolding, just a framework. And then it's like, I got an idea. Then I smoke the weed and the weeds. Like I got an idea. I feel like it's cheating sometimes because the ideas aren't really mine, the weeds ideas,

5 (1h 29m 35s):
The weed is like, listen, it's just relaxing your mind and taking you away from your distractions and allowing you to just kind of relax and think of things that you might not have thought of. If you were distracted by all the seriousness of life. Right.

0 (1h 29m 49s):
I think it's more complicated than that. I think your body is interacting with molecules, that it doesn't come in contact with in the regular world. And these molecules have a spiritual connection to the universe that you're not able to access without them. That's what I really believe. Wait, say that again. I think the molecules of marijuana in particular, when you smoke pot and you just get this, there's this, there's a connection that you get with the universe it's not available when you're sober. Right. When you're avail, when you're sober, I think that your feelings are in some ways, deadened, they're deadened by an accumulation of life experience and overwhelming burden of your existence and your friends and your bills and your obligations in your life.

0 (1h 30m 32s):
There's all these things going on. And all these things sort of like squash and deaden your sensitivity. And then, and then everything, just wall, all, everything opens up and then you have access to thoughts and ideas and feelings that you're just not available without the weed. Yeah.

5 (1h 30m 54s):
Yeah, absolutely. It's a, it's a beautiful thing. That's a beautiful thing. Yeah. I remember the first time I, I was on your show. How many years ago was that at year old? Wow. I think that's back in the day. We're pretty, I think we were pretty high for that one. I think we

0 (1h 31m 12s):
Got too high a lot of times for those shows. Yeah.

5 (1h 31m 16s):
I noticed last time I was here, I was like, Oh, I don't really like to smoke when I do the thing. Cause I kind of get quiet, you know?

0 (1h 31m 23s):
Yeah. We were talking about the election yesterday and I did it with Don and then Dave Chappelle, come on and I got way too. I I'm trying to think of what I really think about the election while I'm doing it. Yeah. Like on one hand, I'm like, I hope people are more relaxed. Like the people that hated Trump, I hope that they're more relaxed and I hope everybody just like maybe, maybe the country can heal together. But the other side, like the people that think that Trump got robbed, like they're angry and it's like, it's almost like people are more separated than ever before. And you know, and there's a lot of people that like there was no election interference. There was no election fraud. Like I think there's always election fraud.

0 (1h 32m 3s):
Always. The question is how much of it is there if you're dealing with hundreds of thousands of workers, like we were talking about it yesterday, like, what is the number of election fraud? Is it, what's the percentage? It's not zero. Is it more than zero? Most people think it's more than zero. Yes. So what's the number? Is it only like a thousand episodes of fraud in the whole country over millions and millions and millions of votes. And it's really <inaudible>, you know, in terms of like the overall effect it's, it's

5 (1h 32m 32s):
Quite possibly it's that. Yeah. In my opinion, I don't, I don't know. I mean, I just, I haven't done anything to research it, so I wouldn't be able to tell you.

0 (1h 32m 40s):
Yeah, for sure. But I just worry about the state of the country in terms of like this polarization between the two sides, the red versus the book. Cause I think it's mostly bullshit. I think mostly people are just Americans and we need to just like whoever's in office now. Let's just like let's support them and hope they do the best. Because one of the things we were saying yesterday was that I feel like when Trump was in office, people literally wanted the economy to tank so that he would be a loser. They want things to go bad because they didn't want him to do well. They would rat, like I was saying, if you gave a lot of hardcore people that were Trump haters, the choice, would you rather have the country do fantastic and have Trump's all of his ideas turn out to be the best for our, our culture, our economy, joblessness, everything everything's doing great, but he's bragging these on TV or would you rather have everything tank?

0 (1h 33m 38s):
And he goes to jail, fuck ham, put him in jail. I think there's a lot of people that would say that they would rather the economy go to shit and Trump wound up getting put in jail and removed from office. Then him being a winner and being successful. It's very strange because he's such a polarizing figure that we, we would rather him fail. And then the United States, not wheat, some people would rather him fail. And the United States be in a real bad situation, then him kick ass and do amazing the United States booming. But this asshole that you hate is like the hero.

5 (1h 34m 15s):
What you do here is amazing because you have this sort of very broad audience of people on both sides on your show and you have found a way to, I guess, not polarize it so badly that half the people don't want to pay attention.

0 (1h 34m 34s):
I don't think we do have two sides. You don't. I think it's a lie. I think we have America. I think we have P you know what I'm saying? That somebody wanted to write something about you like a negative comment about you.

5 (1h 34m 47s):
I like that. By the way, you don't have two sides. I like that. Cause I I've been thinking a lot about that lately. Cause I've been, I've been, you know, I don't know if you can see in some of the videos I became, I got my us citizenship last year. I think I told you that

3 (1h 34m 59s):
They let me in after 20th. But, but so, you know, I got my U S flag that I, I, I hang from my awning in my videos and beautiful, it's beautiful thing. You're out there. And part of what I've been doing with, you know, my photos and my podcast and my traveling is I really part of what it is is I just want to show my little audience at that time. That's tuning in. I want to show them how much there is to celebrate in this country. It's beautiful out there. It's so beautiful. It's rare to go out there. So it's beautiful. I can't believe it. And it was so, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm flying the flag. I'm very proud to be an American. Right. I am very proud of the universe.

3 (1h 35m 40s):
<inaudible> right. Yeah, I am. I am. And I'm also proud to be Canadian. I was getting a little grief.

0 (1h 35m 50s):
Save that, save that you were doing great though.

3 (1h 35m 55s):
I put a little Canada sticker

0 (1h 35m 56s):
In Canada that I think countries, countries are bullshit. I think you guys are basically Northern Americans. They got mad. I go, we're all North America. You go your Canada. I go, this is no different to me than being from fucking South Dakota. Come on. We're all humans on earth. I agree with that. It's nonsense. You just have a different King. Yep. Yep.

3 (1h 36m 18s):
But no, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's interesting because you know, I, you know, everybody on social media has to kind of, you know, if you're putting information out there, you end up now having to deal with getting drawn into this argument, which is frustrating to someone like me because you know, I just want to take some cool pictures and tell some jokes and have some fun and all of a sudden, Oh, I said something that indicated I believe this or that. And you're, everyone's mad at you. So I mean, I find, I find it pretty incredible how you've found a way of navigating that.

0 (1h 36m 56s):
Well, I don't know how I did it. Let me think. I think being honest is one of them. And then also I don't believe in the two sides, I share a lot of opinions from both sides. Like I do not have an ideology that is neatly tucked into the left or the right, but didn't you endorse Bernie? I love so I love all of his ideas about helping community. And I think this is a problem. This is a problem that people that think of themselves as right wing don't they don't want to look at the good aspects of someone from the left, someone from the left like Bernie, first of all, he wants to absolve people's student debt.

0 (1h 37m 41s):
I think if it's possible to spend trillions of dollars in these never ending Wars, it's also possible to absolve people's student debt. I think getting people in debt for hundreds of thousands of dollars when you're fucking 17 is crazy. Your brain is when I was 17. I was a wild person. I was barely a man. I was, I was crazy for 17, 18 years old to have a person like me and give them, saddled them down with hundreds of thousands of dollars. Debt's going to follow them to their grave is crazy. And that's a giant percentage of our population. I don't know what it is, but millions of people are saddled down with that kind of debt.

0 (1h 38m 22s):
Right. It's too much money and it's crazy. And it doesn't make any sense. Education could be something that we make for free. I think we can use our tax money in better ways that benefit the community as a whole. And I think one of them is by giving people the access to education where it doesn't cost hundreds of them.

3 (1h 38m 40s):
Right. Well, and I think we can do what it's like in Canada.

0 (1h 38m 43s):
That is a left-wing perspective, right? Yeah. But I also like guns and I think you should have guns. And I think I, I'm a firm supporter of the second amendment because I know crazy people and there's people that are bad people they're violent and they're broken and they want to hurt other people. And I think you should be able to protect your family. And I think you should be able to protect the loved ones that you, you, you have nearby you. And then this is a, this is a real situation that comes up. We wish it didn't everybody that has a gun hopes. They go to the grave and never have to pull the trigger on a person. Yeah. But, but, but guess what better to have it and not to need it than to need it and not to have absolutely. Now we can pretend all day that the world's a perfect place and you never gonna need a gun, but you and I both know that's horseshit, right?

0 (1h 39m 26s):
So this is a, that's an opinion I share on the right. I'm a, I'm a firm believer in the second amendment. And then you got the first amendment. I would think freedom of expression and freedom of speech is one of the most liberal core tenants that you could, you could ever ascribe to that side. Like the left has always been pro first amendment. The ACL, you literally started out defending fucking Nazis, right? Like saying that like you have to defend everyone's ability to express themselves. Even if their, their beliefs are a Borat. Even if they're the most disgusting beliefs in the world, your ability to express yourself should be a part of being an American.

0 (1h 40m 8s):
And the way we combat bad speech is not by silencing people. It's by better speech and more speech. And that's, that's how we've figured out the way human beings interact with each other, from the jump from the beginning of this country.

3 (1h 40m 25s):
And so that right there is sort of like what we were talking about earlier, when we were talking about how you had the confidence and autonomy with your show to do what you want to do and what you believe politically. That's what you've also done too. You know, you like this, you like that. These are things that are on opposite ends. Why is, why do these, why do these issues? Cause people get divided so clearly divide and where it's like, well, I can't want healthcare and a shotgun. Right? Come on. Like, I kinda like, like not having to worry about getting sick and also I want to go hunting. I mean, what's, what's the, what's the fucking deal. You know, I can't

0 (1h 41m 2s):
A hundred percent. Right. I couldn't agree with you because

3 (1h 41m 4s):
You had the confidence and autonomy to be able to just say it because you didn't have all those people around with clipboards and shit going to be, don't say that because we're on this channel or that channel, and this is our message here.

0 (1h 41m 17s):
That's a lot of it. Right. And it's also that I don't need a job. I don't need, I think one of the things that you could speak to this, right. When you're working in Hollywood, you're always wanting to make sure that you're not saying anything. That's going to exclude you from being hired. Yeah. Right? Like if you, if you want to work in television, you must be liberal. Yeah. You must, or you keep your fucking mouth shut. If you want to get a job on television, like you don't really have many hours. You can't be a right-wing pundit on the side and also working in a sitcom. They don't want you. Right. Right.

3 (1h 41m 55s):
Or can you be down in the middle though? Like you're, you're, you're down in the middle, right. You're not a right-wing pundit. You're not a left-wing guy. Can, you can, you can be down the middle, but even then you say one thing that is contrary to what they believe. And then, and then, then you're in trouble as well.

0 (1h 42m 8s):
Yeah. You can be. Yeah. I mean, it really depends on how, how open-minded the people and how desperate the people are that are hiring you. Like people get desperate, they get, they get panicky. You know, they feel like people get attacked for almost nothing. And then they fire them, you know? Like, cause they don't want blow back. This is a, this is a big part of the whole Hollywood experience. Now, like who? It was, it wasn't Natalie Portman, who was the actress that got in trouble because she played in witches. They were mad at her because she played a witch with three fingers. Like literally, who is it? It's a new movie. It's so dumb. She apologized.

0 (1h 42m 49s):
She literally had to apologize and Hathaway. Thank you. Why? Because, because she played it's in the book. The original book would describe this, which here it is and Hathaway apologizes, but for a portrayal of limb difference, I, Anne Hathaway has issued an apology for the pain, caused to people with limb differences by her character and HBO max movie, the witches based on the role doll adaptation, Hathaway portrays the evil grant high, which was three fingers on each hand that resemble the congenital disorder.

0 (1h 43m 31s):
I don't know what that is. That's a hard SRO. Dak <inaudible> <inaudible> no,

3 (1h 43m 40s):
That word is impossible to say. They need to come up with an easier word for that.

0 (1h 43m 45s):
It's it's crazy. People are looking for people for things to be offended by. And this is a, is this is Anne Hathaway. Should've said I played a witch. Yeah. That which had three fingers. Yeah. I mean, no offense to you. Yeah. It's like, no need to apologize. And if you want an apology from that, you you're probably a fucking asshole. And you know, I'm sorry if you have three fingers, I mean, I'm sorry, if you have a disease that resembles that there may be some benefits to that too. I don't know what they would be, but what would they be? So that was a good problem to come up with. We could probably try to come up with some funny benefits too. That's her character, Jamie

3 (1h 44m 25s):
And I, I sort of understand what it's like when you have something like that, you know? Cause I have one testicle. Right. So, you know, people will sometimes like make a joke about that and I'll go, I'll feel like, Oh, you know, sorry, you have to one test. Yeah. Because I had the testicular cancer. Right. And then someone will make a joke about ah, you know, and then I'll be like, Oh geez. You know, it's not that fun. Having had surgery. And I'm one of your Teslas, sorry, I'm not trying to bring the move down here. But I'm just saying, so it's like, what happens now is that, you know, the internet cheers, the internet sort of now one person with three fingers is, you know, obviously saddened by that.

0 (1h 45m 2s):
I might not even be real in my name. It might be someone looks at her and goes, you know what? I think she should apologize for people that don't have all their fingers and they get mad. It might be someone with five fingers. It's saying this exactly.

3 (1h 45m 15s):
Someone with five fingers assumes the three finger person is offended. Tweets it. Exactly. And then the people with the clipboards at the office have

0 (1h 45m 24s):
To react, get canceled. There is

3 (1h 45m 26s):
There's, there's a, there's a retraction statement from Anne Hathaway.

0 (1h 45m 29s):
Meanwhile, it's actually probably good for the movie. Right? Cause now people hear, I heard about it from my mom. Cause my mom recommended it to my daughters. She's like, I think that they wouldn't enjoy this movie.

3 (1h 45m 41s):
Now if they'd just given her 17 fingers or like 10 fingers, right? No, one's got that. So no one would have been offended that would've been weird anyway.

0 (1h 45m 49s):
Like a fucking like, like a garden rake 10 fingers on each hand.

3 (1h 45m 55s):
There's no, there's no condition where you got

0 (1h 45m 57s):
10 fingers on each too few that people get upset.

3 (1h 46m 0s):
Are we going to get in trouble for sort of giggling about this? I don't know

0 (1h 46m 3s):
What, if you have three arms on each side, would people who worship, Shiva get upset at you?

5 (1h 46m 9s):
Yeah, exactly. Which is

3 (1h 46m 12s):
What did I love the presence of

0 (1h 46m 17s):
All of this remover of obstacles? Is that what? Yeah. What's up Jamie

5 (1h 46m 22s):
In an article talking to someone that seems like they were on the upset side. It says that it seems like they're more mad that the character has this disability and they're also a villain. Not just that they have the disability. It's that? They made them bad.

0 (1h 46m 36s):
Well, isn't the character like not a human it's a witch. Yeah.

5 (1h 46m 41s):
They have fucked up teeth and they're bald and people are mad at their ball at all.

0 (1h 46m 44s):
Oh me too. So I forgot. I'm mad now. I'm bald. The reason I'm pissed. I don't like when people make fun of ball people, Tom, it's not right. It's rude. I am bald and I am mad and Hathaway's bald in that movie. Fuck her. You think it's funny being bald? You get mad about it. No, no, not at all. No. I have a good shaped head. I'm super lucky. I don't have a F a flat flat back of my head. She's kind of hot. It's a ball chick. I did it a ball chick. When I first moved to LA, she was a singer from normal.

5 (1h 47m 15s):
Good, good baldhead though. Thank you. Like not everybody does not everybody does. I think you got like, there's a lot of people with weird heads. You got a good bald head. Like it's like almost like, it's almost like it's supposed to be bald. It's almost if yeah. If you had a full head of hair, you'd be better off to shave it. Oh, I tell you right now. Think about when you had perfect. You know, I should have shave it. It looks better, but

0 (1h 47m 33s):
Well, I do think that back when I was really freaking out that I was losing my hair, I should have shaved my head early on, but I was really worried that I would never get work. Yeah. I got hair transplants using minoxidil. I did the whole thing. I have a stupid scar in the back of my head, like a big smile from hair transplants from the nineties. Cause I was in shock. I was all of a sudden working and I was like, Oh my God, my hair is falling out. Fuck. What am I going to do? And I was thinking, I gotta do everything I can to keep working. Cause all of a sudden I was making all this money that was never making before I was on television and that TV hair. Yeah. You need TV hair.

0 (1h 48m 13s):
And then once I shaved my head, I was like, Oh my God, this is the best thing ever. Right? Like I don't have to ever go to a barber. I just, every couple days I don't worry. I hit it with the buzzers. That I'm good. Yeah. You know, am I standing? You know? So it's like you gonna shave that bitch? What are you gonna do? I don't know. It's getting a little crazy. You kind of look good as like a wild, crazy man with the hair all fucked up. But I like it. I like your hair like that. Getting a little crazy. You, you can like get by with your hair all fucked up. You, you look good with like, as a guy who has like a sock hat who takes it off and steps into the restaurant on a cold day and sits near the fireplace with all fucked up hair.

0 (1h 48m 55s):
It's kinda good.

5 (1h 48m 56s):
It works with like having the headphones on. I've made a choice not to put them on earlier. Cause I thought, Oh well you had your cowboy hat on. Yeah. But, but, but this is, I like this.

0 (1h 49m 5s):
It locks you in like people always say, well you're right across from someone. Why do you wear headphones? The reason why is that? It locks you 100% in the conversation. And you're really aware of talking over each other, which yeah, everyone has a tendency to,

5 (1h 49m 18s):
I was conscious of it, but I've, you know, done enough of this over the years. I knew to play the mic. Right. But I was missing this X, this part of it.

0 (1h 49m 26s):
Yeah. You know what? Like when people don't want to wear the headphones, I'm always like, Hmm.

5 (1h 49m 30s):
Okay. I did want to wear them, but I also didn't want to take off my cowboy hat right away. Cause we're in Austin when you're not wearing

0 (1h 49m 36s):
That around you all, I saw your video. There's

5 (1h 49m 38s):
Dust on it. You know, it's real dust. I got it. I got this at the Stetson factory about five years ago and it's a real Texas hat. So I wanted to, to John B Stetson, I debated not wearing it when I came in because I thought, well, we'll lock in whatever I got in cowboy hat on and attendance, you know? But, but then I thought, you know, shit, we're in Austin. You know, I gotta, I gotta honor your move to Austin where my frigging Stetson goddammit. Right? Cheers. Cheers. My friend. Excuse my language. Sorry. But

0 (1h 50m 7s):
13 silver dollars by culture. Culture wall talks about having a John B Stetson wakes up in the snow in a ditch. I got my health, my John B Stetson got me a bottle for a baby's blue bird wine. And I left my stash somewhere down in Preston, along with 13 silver dollars in my mind. Nice. You ever heard of culture? Wall? I have. I have not replaced them after the show. I wish what he's Canadian. Yeah. Jamie turned me on to him. Jamie is my source. Cause I'm an old man and Jamie's a younger man. Jamie turns me on to good music

5 (1h 50m 46s):
As a singer. Yeah. Yeah. It was, it was a beautiful poetry. I thought it was thought it was a poet or a dude. He's he's a guy that like a Leonard Cohen who was also Canadian

0 (1h 50m 55s):
He's he was 21. And he has this song called Kate McCannon and you listened to it and you would swear to God is an 80 year old man. Who's been drinking and smoking his whole life. It literally doesn't make any sense. Like you hear the song and you're like, what the fuck? I wish we could play it.

5 (1h 51m 17s):
Oh, young, young guy. Yeah. Oh, youngest one here. Some crazy. I feel better about not having heard of him. I thought he was like some classic Canadian artists that has been around for a hundred years. Where's how, how did that? But now I'm glad that you're showing me this one, a hero authentic. This cat is I love this.

0 (1h 51m 34s):
Try to get him on the show. <inaudible> we contacted his agent. This is what the agent said. He works as a ranch hand in Texas over the summer dam. And when he's done, we'll get ahold of you. I bet he's from Calgary is from Alex.

5 (1h 51m 49s):
Berta. Alberta. Yeah. Calgary, Alberta. Because that's where, that's where we got the Alberta. Canada's like the Texas of Canada. Right? We've got this Calgary stampede. And so I was right. He's yeah. He's a cowboy Canadian.

0 (1h 51m 59s):
Shout out to my friend, John and Jen that my friends, John and Jen.

5 (1h 52m 3s):
Yeah. Alberta. That's cool. I love Alberta. Yeah.

0 (1h 52m 5s):
Great. So sketch want, there he is. Yeah.

5 (1h 52m 8s):
Oh wow. He's from Swiftcurrent you know what? That's cool. I'm from Swift current Saskatchewan. He's only 25. Now my grandparents met in Swift, current Saskatchewan, my on my father's side. It's a tiny little place. How they meet? I don't know that story, but I met, I think everybody knew everybody in Swift current, back in the rural, it was probably 20 people living there at the time. But

0 (1h 52m 30s):
This guy comes down to Texas in the summer and he works as a ranch hand or summer. And then when they're like, he's not going to be done anytime soon. This was like, literally like you try to get in touch with him for like publicity. We're blowing them up. I blew blew him up on Instagram. When I, when Donald Trump asked me to host a podcast with him and Joe Biden, I put it on my Instagram and with his tweet and the culture walls lyrics for the, the devil wears a suit and tie. I, I put a quote from one of his layers on his, throw it up there. Oh, I have to like that. Yeah. Just, just, just for just so people would listen to the song,

5 (1h 53m 9s):
Not putting coming art. Is he up and coming artists or when an up and coming artist says they can't come on. The Joe Rogan experience, the biggest podcast in all of the world. That must just make, you want him to come on the show so much, unless you best make you like him so much more that it's like, man, he's got the same. I love it.

0 (1h 53m 31s):
But I love authenticity. Right. So if that's who he is

5 (1h 53m 34s):
Literally a ranch hand, he doesn't have time. He's tending to the cattle.

0 (1h 53m 39s):
Look whenever he wants to he's he can come here. This is like, yeah, come on, have some more baby. Let's do it. Like Dave Chappelle came on yesterday. Dave Chappelle and I have been friends since 1990. They was

5 (1h 53m 51s):
Here yesterday. Yeah. Wow.

0 (1h 53m 53s):
But he's always like, Joe, eventually I'm going to come on your show eventually. Was that the first time he was on? Yeah. And he came home because Darnell was here and he just dropped in and hung out for, it was like an hour. Yeah. And then we're eventually, I shouldn't probably say this on the show, but I'm going to anyway, because we've been drinking. We're going to Dave and I are going to do a residency here. Yeah. Yeah. We're going to do a bunch of shows here.

5 (1h 54m 15s):
Oh really? Yeah. Could I do a spot? Cause I don't come and do it. Fuck you. Five minutes or something. Fuck. Yeah, fuck. Yeah. I would love to fuck. Yeah. I've never met Dave.

0 (1h 54m 24s):
This is a great guy. You'd love him. Love to meet him. He's super genuine. Yeah. He's as genuine as it gets. He's right there. He's he's there's no bullshit with him. He's right there. He's right there with you. But that's the same thing. Like Mike, whenever you're ready, I'm here. You know like the Kanye West thing is like, it was almost the opposite. I was like, I like him too much. I don't want to fuck him up. I don't want him to, like, he was like, when the first time he wanted to come on the podcast, it was, he was recently unmedicated. Like he had done this concert where he said he supported Donald Trump and everybody booed him. And the next thing you know, he's in a mental institution. Remember that?

5 (1h 55m 3s):
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Right. He was on stage that's concert

0 (1h 55m 8s):
And then concert a while after that, he said he wanted to, he wanted to, he wanted to talk about things, but nobody wanted to do it. Or people were afraid to have him on. And I said, I'd be willing. I put it on Twitter. I believe didn't have you on. And we can talk about whatever you want for as long as you want to. And then it became this giant thing. And then him and I had a conversation on the phone and I really enjoyed talking to him. But my hesitation was purely that I didn't want to fuck him over because I do think he's, I mean, for lack of a better term, I think he's a special person. I think he's, he's, there's a rare diamond, right?

0 (1h 55m 51s):
Like it's, it's hard to make a Kanye West. It's like, there's a few people that I know like that, like Joey Diaz is a hard to make a Joey Diaz. You don't get a lot of joy ideas in this life. You get one or two ever. And when I see a person like Kanye, Kanye, and I see how sensitive he is and I see all these people that are trying to chop him down all the time and I made fun of his fucking sneakers. I mean, Jamie, Jamie gave me a pair of Yeezys and I was making fun of him. But I make from everything, I make fun of me too. But I was like, I don't want this guy to have a bad time. So I, I resisted having him on really? Yeah. Even though I knew it'd be a big show, like ratings wise.

0 (1h 56m 31s):
I'm like, I don't want this guy to say something where people get mad at him. And I would rather him just making music. And I really got into his music, like pretty, pretty deep after. I mean, I always loved to shit like gold diggers or classic. Oh, it was a lot of his shit all day. He's got some classic shit. Right. But after he did, after he and I had that conversation, I really got into it. And I was like, man, I don't want anything. I don't want this to be negative. And then I started getting messages from his people. And even some of those people actually got in contact with my wife and they're like, we don't want Kanye to say anything crazy. And having it ruined him. And I was like, let's just leave it all.

5 (1h 57m 10s):
So your wife involved with producing the show zero how'd they get in contact,

0 (1h 57m 14s):
But she knows somebody who knows somebody who knows somebody it's like a multi chain step. Yeah. It wasn't even, but it was like, I was like, all right, let's just leave it alone. Yeah. I'm just going to enjoy his music. I'm like just sleep, let Connie be Kanye. And then when he was running for president and then he was, and then he reached out to me a bunch and he's like, and I'm like, all right, let's just do it. And then he and I had a conversation on the phone and he sounded like super stable and well, I think creative, you,

5 (1h 57m 41s):
You accomplish what you set out to do because I thought he was, I, I felt that I saw a side of him that I've never seen because he really was able to have the time and space to say what was on his mind. He seemed to be in a very good place on your show. Like he was, I've seen him on TMZ and stuff, kind of like scattered, but he was great. And I, and I'm a huge fan because I think he knows that I respect him. So he felt comfortable. Sometimes he sees it a little bit of a roll-up. Right, right, right, right. It's like waiting for this attack. Yeah. Right. He knew there was no attack on me.

0 (1h 58m 17s):
So I think that helped. He knows I love his music and he knows, I think he's a unique human. He's a unique human. There's not a lot of people.

5 (1h 58m 23s):
Right. I love hip hop because I know I saw you tweeted something about Gangstar recently. Gangstar dude. Oh man. I didn't know. Joel like gangster. Oh my God. Cause you know, when I was a kid, I was a rapper and I, I made rap music and stuff and I made beats. I still make beats, but I like just doing it. But a grand star man, like that was, you know, guru step in the arena.

0 (1h 58m 44s):
I was so peeled out when GRU died. Yeah. That was a bummer. But I'm a big fan of DJ premiere. Yeah. I'm a, I'm a big fan of a lot of that East coast. Early hip hop. Yeah. There's some premier like from them,

5 (1h 58m 59s):
His beats are like that. Boom bap. Hip hop.

0 (1h 59m 3s):
Well there's this, there's a grittiness to East coast early hit like Kool G rap. Yeah. New York. Yeah. Giant fan and the streets

5 (1h 59m 12s):
Doing. I still okay.

0 (1h 59m 14s):
Usually I'll listen to that song. Cock blocking Kool G rap. Cock blocking. Yeah. Some great fucking songs man. Streets

5 (1h 59m 23s):
In New York man. That's that's a great song. I

0 (1h 59m 25s):
Love East coast. Hip hop, you know, tribe called quest. Yeah.

5 (1h 59m 29s):
Low end theory is my favorite album of all time. If anyone ever asks me, what's my favorite album of all time. I say the low end theory. Trump. Cool.

0 (1h 59m 36s):
If I had to pick one rapper that, well, I don't know, biggie is pretty top on the list, but also NAS, like does something about nausea's lyrics? Like NAS has the best lyrics, like NAS his lyrics. I'll go back over his lyrics. Like, like that river rewind song where he does the whole story backwards. Like, come on, man. He's so good. He's so creative. And his, his lyrics are there. His dad was a jazz musician. Okay. And I think that's true. Jazz or blues. His dad was a musician like a, like a professional well-respected musician.

0 (2h 0m 17s):
And not as sort of, I think sort of embodied that ethos and put it into hip hop, you know? Cause like one thing I remember from Mo betta blues, remember that movie, like the movie where I remember being like real when Denzel Washington was like, wouldn't even fuck his girlfriend because he had a practice. I was like, wow, that's dedication. I right. And I remember thinking like that dedication that of a blues musician has, or a jazz musician has where they're just constantly practicing their instrument is so much different than a standup

5 (2h 0m 56s):
Or the same. Yeah. Stand up. So it's just very similar to, I sometimes think stand up. I mean,

0 (2h 1m 3s):
So much of us are fuck up sorta like jazz, right? Yeah. But fuck ups in that we don't practice. Like they do they'll practice for hours and hours every day.

5 (2h 1m 11s):
You're getting up on stage every night, man. That's practicing man. Should practice before you get up on stage. Ah, most comics don't well, how are you going to do it sitting in front of the mirror until

0 (2h 1m 22s):
Writing, writing, going over your notes.

5 (2h 1m 25s):
But I mean, I'm just, I'm saying, you know, I feel like, cause I, I feel like, I mean, what do I know? But like, you know, say it's, it's the space between the notes, right? That's what they talk about with jazz. Right? The space between the notes. You had a COVID test today.

0 (2h 1m 44s):
Same thing. Yeah. We both did, bro. That's the same thing.