
Hello friends. Welcome to the show. This episode, the podcast is brought to you by the mother fucking cash app. The number one app and finance and all of the land, the easiest way to send money between your friends and family without having to hold onto paper. Cash has been, who knows where the fuck it's been, right? But the cash app is also the very best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily, weekly, or even biweekly, which is known in the industry. There's a whole Bitcoin industry flux. You didn't even know it's known in the industry as stacking SATs. SATs is short force at Toshi, who is this legendary person who created Bitcoin? That's a pretty big secret to hide, right? Isn't that impressive? But no one knows who that is. It's like, you could compare it to Banksy, right? The banks have currency, maybe even more. It's weird because those, those internet, people like that, Bitcoin people, they're probably very curious and they have a lot of resources. Anyway, we know what Bitcoin is though. Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment network powered by its users with no central authority. It's basically like the utopia of currency. And you can start today with the cash app. Of course, when you download the cash app, enter the referral code, Joe Rogan, all one word, you will receive $10 and the cash app will also send $10 to our good friend. Justin Wren's fight for the forgotten charity, building Wells for the Pygmies in the Congo. And we're very proud to be a part of that. Through that they've built several Wells and raised a lot of money and they're in the process of building more Wells as we speak. And again, Justin runs the nicest person that's ever lived. So don't forget promo code, Joe Rogan, all one word. When you download the cash app from the app store or the Google play store today, we're also brought to you by Traeger grills. This is a super easy add for me because I cook on this thing four nights a week. I almost like if I'm home for weeks on end, it's more than that. It's almost every night. I love cooking on these grills because they're so versatile. First of all, it's a pellet grill with a pellet grill is when they cuts, they cut wood, they take the sod


dust and they compress it using the natural sugars of the wood, no chemicals, no additives. You pour these pellets into a worm drive. It feeds it to a heating element. It's much more sophisticated than this. Obviously there's like electronics and


engineering, all that shit. But the end result is fire and wood. That's it. It's a super complicated way to get the most old school and most delicious method of cooking, fire, and wood. And it also has recipes on the application. They have an application that you can control your grill from. So you, anywhere you want, you could literally, you could cook anything and like decide, okay, it's 20 minutes in. I look at the meat thermometer. It's, you know, whatever it is, one 20 now I got to lower the temperature and you can do whatever you want with it as 1500 plus recipes. And you can actually navigate the recipe through the app. Like you put it in and the app knows what you're cooking. So the Apple change the temperature of the grill after a certain time. It's amazing shit. They're fantastic. Easy to cook bake, grill barbecue. You can do whatever the fuck you want. They're amazing. They're available online or in 10,000 plus stores nationwide. Visit Traeger grills.com/joe, and use the code Rogan at checkout for free shipping. Why couldn't I say that? Use the code Rogan at checkout for free shipping. We're also brought to you by blue moon and they're damn delicious Average. There they're exceptional beer. Blue moon is a celebration of the moments we spend together. Even while we're apart. I don't know what that means exactly, but what, what blue moon means to me is it's a, it's a delicious beer that I've been buying for a long time. It's a strong, distinctive Flavor. Now, the way they Describe it as Valencia orange peel for subtle sweetness, coriander, which provides balance oats create a smooth creamy finish best served in a glass with an orange garnish to showcase its beautiful hazy color that you could do that if you want. I'd like it right out of the bottle. It's fucking delicious and you can get it delivered to you. The name came after a satisfied taster said a beer. This good comes around once in a blue moon, it's a perfect name and you can get it delivered. Visit, get.blue moon beer.com and see what your delivery options are. And in some areas, local delivery is available in one to three hours. So get blue moon delivered by visiting. get.blue moon beer.com. See your delivery options. Add a special touch to your holiday season with the brightness of blue moon, brewed with Valencia orange peel for unique vibrant taste, reach for the moon. Celebrate responsibly blue moon brewing company, golden Colorado ale. And we're brought to you by manscaped. Manscaped keeping your balls fresh and clean, shave down with no danger. That's what's important when you usually use an electric Trimmer on your nut sack, you're scared With good reason. Well, the lawnmower 3.0 from manscape has got that all beat. They offer a replaceable ceramic blade with advanced skin safe technology, which helps greatly reduce your grooming accidents. It's just way better. You feel much more With a machine down there that near the twins, The waterproof technology also allows you to grow them in the shower. And for up to 90 minutes, their liquid formulations are also complete game changers. The formulations are all vegan cruelty, free dye free sulfate-free paraben-free so you know, your, your glitzy is in good hands. That's their words. Glitzy. I've never called my, my family jewels


Glitzy. They also have a foot duster foot deal to rent free stinky feet people out there. I'll be one of those. And it's just an awesome, it's an awesome company. They make great products for ear cleaning, Clean out your nose, hair, trim it all down. But the star of the for sure Is the lawnmower 3.0, it's the best way to trim your ball here. And you really should trim your ball here. And you should go to manscape.com/rogan and you will get 20% off plus free shipping. When you go to manscaped.com/rogan. So that's 20% off free shipping and make sure your balls look like a Turkey's neck for this upcoming Thanksgiving with manscaped manscaped.com/rogan. That's actually in the copy. How good is that company? They got it. Nailed. My guest today is a hilarious stand-up comedian. You might know him from the Chappelle show. You might know him from his own podcast or his numerous appearances doing stand-up on television. He's a shit. I love him to death. Please give it up for Donnelle Rawlings Rogan experience. Train by day, Joe Rogan podcast by night, all day, Don. Now what's going on? See my friend. Take me to the river. I want to go, I'll


go take me to your river. I want to go. I don't even know what you don't know. Seize that song. Leon bridges. Leon bridges. Yeah. He's like a folk country. Singer black dude. I think he's a Louisiana is where he's from. But about five years ago he had a very popular song. That was like a song that really charted, well, it was called the river. That was that. That was that song. And then he is, and then what he does is Jamie I've seen him before, but this song is like he's had other songs, but for some reason, this song resonated with a lot of people in the country, man.


It was like him reminiscing with corner place. What made her feel good in the river? I hope when we go Over to Spotify, we can play it. Take me to your real high. I want to go <inaudible> that's pretty much it. That's the one part. Everybody knows Acceptable now for people to wear like neck carts, scarfs. Are you being insulted shifts? No, not at all. It's what are you saying though? If you had wore that on any other time, I'd be like, what is on your neck? And I would explain it to be a Gator, right? Cater. I know what it is. I know what a Gator is. This, this is what it is. It's my game. What you're wearing when you're sneaking up on animals or you don't wear black people.


Well, that color is not that you can't sneak up on anybody. Okay. This is going to go. Isn't that? Yeah. I guess that's a rainbow. Yeah. It's not as traditional. This is the liberal liberal gay liberal Gator. Yep. It's accepted by anybody. Gay people, black people, Hispanic people. I'm sorry. No worries. A baby mother asking me about weed. Jesus don't you don't like me. Why you keep blowing me up about weed? You said you don't me. I mean, they like something bad. What happened to your thumb? I got shot. Who shot you? That's the question. I haven't found the answer to really.


It was the shit happened so quick, Joe. I didn't really go to get a good look at a person. The person that shot me. Not too many people around or witness it, but I have the wound to show that I got shot. What was the situation? I was my dog. I got a little, I got a new Adorable that says adorable as a dog. Guests, ladies and gentlemen. Look at that little cutie. Yo, can you see her on, on camera? Yo, this is my emotional support. That's Maggie. Yeah. That's Maggie. Maggie, come here, sweetie. Come here. Maggie. Give me honey. She's a dog. She doesn't know what coffee is. She's like me. She don't know what she knows It is, but she don't know what coffee is, but I was protecting her.


Some people were Joe. You want to hear the story about how I got shot or what? Yeah. I was protecting her honor. Right? I was protecting her from a hell of bullets. It was a gang. It was a lot of people. I don't remember all of that, but I got shot at my motherfucking thumb. Where were you in the streets? Oh, just regular. Yeah, I was, I was in the street. The streets in the streets. Town. No, just the streets. And that happens sometimes. Joe, you put yourself hanging in the streets. You put yourself in some unforgiven situations. That that's what happened to me. And that's how I got my motherfucking thumb shot to fuck off.


And that's the story I'm talking. That's the story that I'm sticking. So you got caught in the crossfire Bullets. Jesus 45 shots rang out really legitimately pop, pop, pop up fat, fat, fat, fat, fat, fat, fat, fat. Wow. And this is the only injury I sustained. I'm very happy that that's the only injury you sustained. You're not happy about it, Joe, because when I love you, come on, You love me. But when I told you I got shot, you continued to quit. Well, Danielle that's because you're Darnell. Right? But you continued it. I didn't question you. Like, I didn't believe you. You did 100%. You didn't believe it so casually. That's what she said. Do you want to drink? He said, I can't. I'm on antibiotics.


I said, what happened here? That's it. Any of my other friends Who'd been shot. If I said, Hey man, what happened? And they said, I got shot. If I didn't just end right there. They would say, it's the craziest story ever, man. But don't to the car. And I had my little dog. I was protecting her. It's a story that I told. But the thing that you didn't believe me, if someone said he got shot, You can't say, I didn't believe you. That's not true. It didn't look the look of your face. It's like, it's unusual. The way you were describing it, I got shot. And then you wouldn't say anything more. Why people don't why? What happened? How'd you get shot. Well, you remember I had a disagreement with so-and-so.


Well, we found, we had an opportunity, our paths cross, we found it a situation where those energies came together. We was like, how are we going to settle this? Right. It wasn't like that. It wasn't like that. It was Okay. So you don't want to get specific about details? No, I don't want it to get specific. I just want you to respect the fact that I got shot, That you got shot. I do respect it. I'm sad that you got shot, but I'm glad you're okay. I'm better. I'm good. How was your thumb doing? Is it going to be all right? Yep. It's going to be good. You know, we got all the bullet fragments out of it. You know, we avoided the surgery, so I'll be good. Just got to get the range of motion back. Oh, that's real good. They didn't have to do any surgery and tendons or anything like that.


Nope. I got lucky. I have a friend who cut his finger on a window man. And he never got his fingers back again. His fingers are like this curve. I know everybody knows a motherfucker like that. And we've all made fun of that motherfucker. We've made fun of the person that you know, that don't have a thumb, but I'm telling you during this, after me surviving this gunshot shit, just buttoning my pants become a task that I took advantage. I took, took for granted. Right? The point I'm making is that you're lucky to have all your limbs, all your shit on your body. Yep. So you don't appreciate it till one a motherfucker gone. Well, I think that's the case with everything, right? Like we didn't appreciate how good we had it before the lockdown, before COVID came around, nobody appreciated how good we really had it.


We was living in a moment. We were also spoiled. We're spoiled by how good everything was. But we didn't, I didn't think it was spoiled because that was what was going on. Right. Until shit shifted. And then same thing. Like, you lose your thumb. You're like, Oh shit. You know, I really do appreciate doing those three spots that night. You know what I mean? I appreciate the fact that I could just walk with my family anywhere and I wouldn't be judged. I wouldn't be discriminated against whatever. It just be like Joe and his family, not just like, do you have a mask or not? Right. You know, but I do believe that it took a pandemic for people to really realize what the most important things in life are.


I think so for sure. I think at the beginning, people were nicer because they were scared and they were like, it was almost like post nine 11 feeling like we're all in this together. Right. That didn't last very long. It was unrealistic to think that everybody's going to be that way. People don't get frustrated. Yeah. And what's also resources started getting low and people started realizing they're not going to be able to work for a long fucking time. And you see the governor got busted. Did you see the photos? Which governor, governor, California. He got busted for what? Got busted, going to a restaurant with 12 people. No social distancing, no masks, all the shit that he's been preaching for. He didn't do. They were saying that he was in outdoors. Like his, his people said it was outdoors, but now they have photos of it. A hundred percent endorse. They're all endorsed The unrealistic part about that.


You know, people got to push their platform. This masters has been crazy, but me, I know it shouldn't be like this. And I know it's like, but what does it shit girls up in here. But what does it represent when I see motherfuckers like that in a situation that no mass, not social distance. I just assumed that they all been tested and they all been in a bubble situation. Cause you've been in a bunch of bubbles situations. Like when Dave did, he shows down in yellow Springs bubbled me first, I bubble you here. You're the first person. You're the first person. You didn't rape my nose. You raped break my finger. I didn't do it. Yes. You did hire a nurse, made somebody do it. You could call it whatever the fuck you want to do.


But she worked for you. That's true. And you forced that, that she had to do it. Well, I just suggested it'd probably be a good idea for everybody. Yep. Date, but it was a good for everybody. And you knew that. So we know like that's a bubble world, but it's not surprising that you see the governor in a situation like that because I'm pretty short. It doesn't send out the right message. But I'm pretty sure that the motherfuckers was tested. Well, that's what he should have said. They can't say that because they're a politician and everybody would go, wait a minute. If I just test people, can I go to work? Like what Dave's doing with all his shows, test people in the audience and you can have a full audience. You can, you know, you have a bunch of people that are healthy. You know, you, you, you're taking the measures to create that safety. It's a bubble.


Here's the thing that a lot of people understand is that like you could literally create your own bubble. Yes. Like I know people that want certain States, you have to meet a certain requirement to be tested. You can't be a tested list you used to have, she starts showing symptoms, but you could create your bubble, this testing almost everywhere. There's an opportunity for people to get tested. It's a little harder than that for most people. Because most people, most people in terms of like, just, people's just your access to it. It's not that common where you can go to a place and get a quick test here. Okay. So then what's the difference. And I may be wrong that this may be my ignorance, like California. Like I know the situation like a Dodger stadium.


You know what I'm saying? Like for the most part, anybody with, I guess a California idea, whatever they can get. No, but hold on. You know, that takes hours. You know, those people have to wait in line for hours. There was a line to get it done. Yeah. Yeah. No one does. There are stupid fucking, if you have a job, man, if you have a job and you're supposed to be at work at 9:00 AM and you, you get to the COVID thing at seven 30 and they tell you it's a two and a half hour line. That's what it is. That's the reality. And most of those aren't giving you the results immediately, Immediately, but enough where you could, if you got those results to say you get those results in 18 hours, say you were going to plan a family function or something. You don't do. What I'm saying is like when the bubble, the idea of the bubble first started, started with the MBA.


You kind of contribute to that. Dave did it. Yes, he did it first. Yeah, they did. Did it. And UFC did it first. He always thought like, Oh my God, you don't have to be a millionaire to create a safe bubble for you and your family, your friends, Right? No, you can do it now. Easier than ever before. But the problem with the governor saying is other people will let us make a bubble and go to work. Cause that's what they should do. What they could do is what we're doing here, which is lucky that podcasting is An essential business. I think she's trying to jump down. She's not trying to kill herself. She's just looking over the No, she's my emotional dog. I understand. Right. Listen, if anybody got to jump, it's going to be me. I'm in tune with her. Okay.


She's the most adorable little dog I've ever seen. I never seen a little dog as a puppy. Maggie rivers. She's five months old. She knows her biological dad. And I'm her new dad. It was important for me, for her to know her biological dad. Because I didn't want her to come from a place with like mental issues of shit. But I understand she's intuitive mother. She knows her to her brothers and sisters. They have play dates. She's aware. She knows she's my, my little bitch right now. What kind of dog is she? A Chihuahua pit bull? No, she's far hippo. Dead dog. Don't look like his water. What kind of pit bull fuck did a toy pit bull, right? Oh really? Little ones. She's toys, Toys, toy.


Pitbulls are cute. Little dogs. She's Parotia don't let that fucking sad eyes fool. You, Have you ever seen a toy pit bull? Jamie? They're really tiny. I mean, no real pit bulls. Like the fighting pit bulls. They were like 30 pounds. They weren't big dogs. The ones that they bred for fighting the smaller ones. The little, little demons. I don't even know if I can remember ever seeing a small pickup. Yeah. Brian Callan used to have a small pit ball. It was a tiny one and it was fun. That's where he gets his personality from. It's not him. We went to a guy who raised them for fighting. Oh shit. Yeah. We were like in our twenties, mostly puppies, but Oh my God. Look how tiny. Yeah. Damn that little motherfucker look tough as shit.


The black one, the black lives matter one second. God. That's ridiculous. That dog's ridiculous. See, that's the thing that they do. They, they take these dogs and They, the legs and shit like that. Right? Well, no, they just breed them. They, they do. What's called a like they, they select right? So like a dog with shorter legs. I'll breed with another dog with shorter legs. And they'll try to select for certain traits. Like I used to have a dog that was from Hawaii and they used him for hog hunting. That's what they use his family forest. So he had long, It was a dog specific to Hawaii. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. They, they, they breed a lot of pit bulls in Hawaii For one of their jobs.


Cause most dogs had do they go get birds? The fuck does hog hunting. Say what they do is in the real thick brush, you can't really get to the hogs. Like it's hard to shoot him, you with a gun, like you're shooting through hundreds of yards of brush or the dogs can go in there and get them and they'll hold them to hold the pig. So there's a style of that Makes the hunting easy though, right? It does. Except for the dog. It's not like the same kind of hunting because you're relying a hundred percent on the dogs. Usually there's two groups of dogs, depending on what animal you like. If they, they hunt mountain lions, he's to use a certain kind of dog that'll Bay, the dog that'll Bay, the mountain line. But if they hunt pigs, a lot of times they'll use an animal that lets you know where the pig is and then they release other animals that hold the pig.


So those are the, those are the pit bulls and then you shoot them. Well, they usually stab them hand like, yeah, that's kind of fucked because spreads is all about the dog. It's the dog is the one who did it and you just finished the job. Damn. It's crazy too. There's excuse me. There's there's videos of it, of the way they do it. And it's like, woof. And I've been asked to go on one of those hunts. I'm like, I am not interested in doing that. Like what happens when the dog gets old? Do they like get new dogs? But this is a, this is a thing that people are doing for two reasons, one for food, right? Cause this is the best way that they can get food. Like you can trap this animal and then that's how you're going to get the animal.


If you just rely on just hunting with like a rifle or a bow and arrow and real fix shit with wild pigs, you're probably going to go hungry. So, so there's that. And then the other thing is these are invasive animals. Like they, they brought over to Y and they're wild and they have no predators. So they have to kill them. They have to get So did they bring him up here to kill us a species of something? Like I know that They brought them over for food, like captain cook and those dudes used to do that shit. They used to release ghosts. No, Kevin Cook Island CA I know captain crunch. I know captain crunch. Okay. I don't know Kelly's shit stuff. Captain hook was a, an old pirate, right? Wasn't he cook? Cook? Don't say hook hook was pirate. Telus, captain cook.


He used to go to islands and they would drop off animals. So that the next time they came around, they'd have something to eat. So they'd leave goats on an Island. I think that's how the goats got on Galapagos. I think that's how they got on a lot of islands. These pirates or sailors would drop these animals off. But meanwhile, the animals would destroy ecosystems. Yeah. But you had some fresh goat when you can fresh coat. Yeah. Fuck the rivers here. There's a lot of turtles too. They killed off a lot of sea turtles because they would take sea turtles and they would flip them over and put them on their back and they'd be good for weeks. And then they would eat them. Cause you don't, you don't need any, they don't need anything. Like they can survive just on their back for weeks and weeks and weeks.


And you don't have to worry about refrigeration or them. Yeah. But you can't tell somebody you're hunting turtles. You're not trying to do it for space Slow as a motherfucker. Be like, I fucking stopped this fucking hold this turtle for three days. I think they probably get them on the beach. But if you've got them in the water, that'd be quick sea turtles. And we catch a motherfucker, a turtle on the road and it was always one country, motherfucker like this. He used, it was a mechanic in the neighborhood and he had like oil up under his hand. He always help people's baby mothers with fucking changing it. Brake pads and shit. Just one of those grimy, dirty mother fuckers that eat any type of roadkill.


And whenever we saw fucking a deer dead turtle or something, we knew that nigga was gonna be yelling out. Turtle soup. Yeah. People like turtle soup. I'm not a big of it, but I've Never had it. Yeah. It seems like it would probably be an alligator meaty, meaty type of family. I'll get it tastes good. It is. Yeah. Everything tastes good when it tastes like chicken. That's the reference for any thing? It tastes like chicken. Yeah. I have frog legs recently. They were good. You it's I've had frogs before, but trying to convince a black person, he frog legs is a tough sale. That's order to get a black person to order frog legs off of a menu.


It's like getting them to say, I want my steak. What a rare it's always got to be well done. Well done. No, that's what I'm saying. I don't know. But how do you eat your steak? Medium. Medium. Not medium rare. There's a lot of black people that watch this show you. Ain't going to be like, I'm a tell you where he changed when they started talking about when they was like, when they started talking about blood, that's where he lost the streets so that I could do medium, medium rare. I can't do it. I would. I understand. I've had it like that, but my preference would be medium.


Yeah. But average circle that I grew up, My jiu-jitsu instructor eats it well done. And when he orders it, I cringe like shock Machado. Well done. I go, Whoa. Do you know what that feeling is for the sh imagine the chef that gets the order. It says two, well done stakes at table 49. They're calling them every fucking racial thing today. That's the quickest way to fucking make somebody order a fucking well done. Steak. I did not enjoy it at all. Did not cooking it like that. That's a weird thing. Like a preference thing. Like if you ask people's preference, like it's not like you just cook it. Like if you order chicken, they just cook your chicken. They don't ask you what temperature.


You'd like your chicken breasts. They just cook it. Right. But even pork chops, same thing. Right? They don't ask you. But with steak, they'll give you options. Well, why the fuck you give me an option. If I can have all done, You should just have it your way. But it's just insulting. It is. But it's assaulted. Give the opportunity to insult because they do have that as an option. You ever been a certain way, like judge somebody, by the way they order their steak. Yeah, I do honestly. But, but again, John jock Machado, like I said, I have nothing but respect for him, but it makes me sad that he likes well done meat. I know this is going to be bad people, but like what type of brother am I?


But I took my sister out to eat once she ordered the steak and she ordered well done. I said, I think you should order something else. I said, I'm not paying for a leather belt. Wow. And I didn't even have to eat the shit. I wasn't gonna do it. I just felt fucked up. When you felt judged. I didn't feel I was judging a little judging. Yup. I was like lift that fucker hood shit. But isn't that the only food that we have that with like cheeseburgers, nobody gives a fuck. If says, how do you want your cheeseburger? You're like, Well, in the black community, in the black community, when you say cheeseburger, for the most part, that's going to be well done. You don't want to see the pink in it. They want, they'll tell you all the pink out. Well, you really Should with ground beef.


See the thing with ground beef is you don't know what the surface area is when you're eating ground beef. Right. They take a cows, whatever. And they grind it up the stuff in the middle, like that could have been on the outside. Right. So you don't know, like when you get a steak, you sear the outside, you cook the outside. There's no room for bacteria. Anything that could have grown on the outside is dead. And the inside, you don't have to worry about unless it's rotten. That's why black people get their fucking hamburgers. Well done. That's wise. We didn't know it, but that's just what it was for hamburger. I don't want to get food poisoning. Right? Yeah. Hamburgers in class. You are right there when they grind it or you go to a top shelf restaurant where they literally they'll take a piece of Chuck roast and they'll grow or even Freeman yawn.


Like some of them do it with like a leaf. The burger is ground out of filet, man, young, you in the right neighborhood. You're in the right neighborhood. They usually add fat to it. Believe it or not to make a juice here. Yeah. I'll make a juice here. White people with blood though. I don't know. I mean like, like I noticed, but white people get a kick out of like the rarest. They can order your steak. Like the blood part of it. Like, you know, Rare is weird when somebody orders rare or you know what, But you be, you proud of the blood, Joe. No, every time you post the elk pitcher, it's like, you can't just show the meat. You want motherfuckers to see the knife and you do your pitcher, Joe. And it's like, you waited for the blood to sweat at a certain temperature.


You know what? It looks the bloodiest. And that's the shot you always want Trying to do. And I'm trying to do is show that it's cooked perfectly. That's medium rare with respect for the meat. When I do it, I use a thermometer. I mean, I do it nice and slow. And I know, you know how to cook. Wait a minute, wait a minute. Wait a crazy, wait a minute. Just trying to explain something. Wait a minute joke. But you are a man of wilderness. Yes. Right? And all that. You will respect it. Right? Look at that though. Look where that Joe look. Perfect. Look at that. That's perfect. You can't, it doesn't get better than that, but You're proud of the color of it Because it's perfect. It's perfectly cooked, But it looks it's like, what is it?


That's elk. That's super athlete. Okay. I argued with someone because I told them that you like elk and I can make elk. And they were like this, but they were like, Papa makes it. The last time I spoke to you about me cooking. You were very condescending. That's not true. Yes. You were. You said It the same way. I said you got shot. No. Okay. So you can cook. Yeah. And did you ever start condescending? It is. But the way that, the way you looked at me, you looked me up and down. You judge me different joke. That's the difference. But I said I could cook elk. Let me just see what I've heard of. Let me tell you whatever You cook really well. Okay. I heard you have amazing barbecue skills.


That quite, That could be borderline racist. That could be borderline. You said barbecue. You listen. Barbecue Is one of the most complex forms of cooking. I know, But you got to do Oh, too much. You fuck it up too little. You don't do it. Right. And then it's hard to put it back on because it hasn't been sitting at the same temperature. That's the art of barbecue. But when I hit barbecue, I think about the barbecue, like the black barbecue. I understand Frankie Beverly and the whole thing. It's a whole production, not just one piece of barbecue. That's what I've seen in Texas. It's mostly white people, I think. And I, yo I will say this personal experiences. I will say this white people can fucking smoke some meat.


They know how to do it here. I'll tell you that day. When I first got it. I think it was a place called blacks. I don't know if you found a favorite blacks phenomenal. Didn't that, that franchise didn't they break up like, yes. They broke up. Well used to be with a family. Then the sons started on their own place. They literally, they had some issues. I don't want to air their dirty laundry on the podcast, but the, somebody Stole something happened. Something happened. Somebody gave up the secret sauce. These people, Terry blacks in town has only been open since 2014, I believe. And it, it feels like a place has been around a hundred years. I mean, they got it dialed in that barbecue's off the hook. Yeah. Think about it.


They have to have it dialed in. If, if they came up generations and generations, they're just putting whatever the recipe is, whatever I know they make their own, they make their own smokers. They use giant propane tanks and they make their own smokers. Oh, maybe that's what I enjoy. Next level. White people level of barbecue. And when they start doing the machines and yeah, I should say they hire someone to make their smokers, but they get this dude to make the smokers out of propane tanks. They're not buying like a big commercial smoker. They're having this commercial smoker made. We think he was a short game, bro. They did an amazing job. They wanted it to their specifications. And those, those propane tanks are thick as fuck. It's heavy.


The wood. Well you cook with wood. Okay. What is an offset? You know, all those smokers work, right? So you have an office, a firebox, the firebox is over on the side and they're constantly checking the temperature and opening the flus. Make sure it's at a perfect temperature. And then you've got the smoker, which is off to the side and then moving meat around. Cause it's hotter where the air comes right out. But there really well it's Oh my God, they got a dialed in. Their brisket is ridiculous. It's so good. That's the, what I'm talking about, bro. That shit, Millsy a mouth and it's don't come off bloody like that Different kind of animal that's that's that's elk. I mean, you could have elk and you could do it that way. They cook the neck meat. That way. My friend John Dudley we're in neck meat because the neck meat is very strong, dense, because elk has giant antlers.


Right? So Kara it's like, it's doing weights, But elk doesn't have no fatty is no fat, No fat, no fat. There's a little bit of fat on the outside of them, but there's no fat in the meat at all. It's a totally different thing. So you got to cook it slow. So if it's anything other than that, like medium rare like that, it's going to be dried out. Right? You want it just cooked slowly and see it on the outside. So like I take a totally different approach. If I'm cooking to like a ribeye from a, a cow versus an elk steak, completely different way of cooking. I know that because you never post regular steak pitchers. It's like, no, you don't. You don't never, you fucking, once you did your fucking first elk, your regular steak pictures was just dead, man.


Well, they're not as interesting to me. Regular steak is great. I'll cook. It. I'll eat it. But the ALC is like, I have an intimate relationship with that. Everyone knows that. Of course. I mean, even when I tell people I'm going to do your show, they're like take a bite of the ELP for me. I'm serious, man. It's like, yo, you does some cool shit. They seen you do a lot of cool shit, but they never seen you. And you told me, do I really want elk? And I was like, yeah, but I had, I was in the hospital recovering from an injury. So I couldn't get here the way I want it. That's a lucky injury in the sense. Right? I mean all the things that could have gone wrong with your thumb, not even need surgery, right.


When we get the bullet fragments out. That's how I run my life, man. I try to make it easy as possible. Anybody else could have fucking mad? This injury I've been fucked up. He can't stop me. Neither can this fucking thumb, man. Yeah. How does it feel? I know it's a crazy question. You get it all the time from being from a place like you were saying, like what we took advantage of the, one of the things we never took advantage of stage time. Cause we always did it, but not having it accessible to you all the time. How does it feel here with not being able to like, you know what, I'm good. Ready to go. Do like fucking three spots and hammer some shit out real Well. The, I haven't done that since March. You know, since the store closed down, there was no comedy at all in LA.


So it was great. It was a whole life shift. The only time I did it on the road was July and July. I did four shows at the Houston improv. I had a great time. I just left her man. It was, did you feel, I know this sounds crazy. I know we gonna get into some mad shit mask, shit story, whatever. But it's a club that had a certain capacity now they got to trim it down to meet whatever the mandated Rosa, but people were in their temperature check. They were in the air and yeah, I know. Sounds crazy. Some people were mad. Some people didn't have mess and I'm thinking I'm not mistaken. They sell the tickets as a group. Right. I don't know if they're doing that now, but they're doing that a lot of places Like you feel good about it, you know?


But then it's like people take away from that feeling because it's always somebody like where's the mask, Right? There are, there are people that are rightly upset at people taking risks because those people that do take risks could then get sick. And if they're in responsible enough to take a risk and get sick, they might be irresponsible enough to go out and mingle with people. And they know they're sick. Some people are like that. Some people are selfish, you know that. Right. I know that. Yeah. So that's what you have to be. And then they could even give it out when they don't know they have it, but you're asymptomatic. But then at some point don't you have to be selective about the people that you gauge.


Don't you have to be selective on the chances. This is my frustration. I'm not a mass or non masker. Like people make the argument. But what if I'm in the, what if I go to the grocery store and I have my mask on and there's this old lady that doesn't have a mask on, then I don't think you should go places where it could be people that don't have their mask on. Shouldn't you order online. Just don't get in that lady's face and you're going to be fine. It's it's man. I don't think you should tell some old lady that she has to put a mask on. I ran into an old lady at the grocery store. She didn't have a mask on. And I was like, all right, what are you going to do? She's old, man. I mean, this lady, she probably feels terrible breathing through the mask probably feels like she doesn't have much time as my tech.


She had one on, but she was doing this shit. I got into argument up. Yo, that shit I get yelled at. I went to a grocery store. I'm getting a couple of items and I had my motherfucking mess. And Joe, when I tell you the tip of my nose was showing the tip right here, man. And this lady was behind plexiglass. She had sanitized and she was squirting the register or admitted. She had a mask, everything and my shit went right to the tip of my nose. She was like, sir, sir, sir, sir, you got to put your mask on. You gotta put your mask on. I'm like, Oh, I'm sorry. Okay. Now I got to pay, I do Apple pay. But to get into my phone, you got to open up the phone with my face. So I put it down. Sorry. I'm sorry.


I'm like, I'm trying to pay. I got to log in. My Fisher was like, well you can't do that in here. Right? You can't use your Apple pay. I can't shut my face to open my phone. You gotta use Samsung pay that. You let use your fingerprint time to switch to Android. I don't have an Android. I don't have, that's very evil for you too. I know, but I wouldn't talk about your fucking phone, Joe. Why is it evil? Because it was the wrong time. It was the fucking wrong and the thing I was making. So I had told you guys, This is a, sorry, this is what I had to do, Joe. I had to actually stand, leave the register, go to where I could do outside.


Show my face over the phone, him and I went to pay. And then when that happened, I could have been pissed, but I couldn't be like, you know what? I'm just never going to go to that store again. Well, it's just a lady work and they would just put the mask over your nose. I'm not going to put myself in a situation where I can get frustrated. I did it. It was just worse. W is there any Apple pay You already arguing with her? Right? Is that part of the problem? I never said I was arguing. So she was already telling you, put your mask over your nose. So she was at a heightened state of awareness. Frustration. Yeah, but she also, I don't know if it was maybe, you know what it was me. I didn't see that energy around anybody else.


Perfect time to use the black card. I'm not going to do it. It's the nose card that she saw your nose. And she's some people are just like real sticklers for shit. You know, Bridget fetisi comic from LA writer. She told me she was walking on one side of the street and there was a guy across the street, on the sidewalk on the other side, yelled at her, put on mask. Let me tell you something to this argument. I know it's for safety and everything. I know it's for safety and what the lives we share and all that. But for some people it's a perfect opportunity to be an asshole. Exactly. It's like, and that's the like the fine line is like, do you really care about this mask? Or you get to either this discrimination against mass people and no, no mask.


It's just, people have an opportunity to tell people what to do. They get mad. Yeah. You want to hear to it? Then they get mad because you're not listening to the rules. Fuck. Right. Well, that's why I put people at particularly upset at this Gavin Newsome shit. Cause he wasn't the one telling us you can't have large gatherings for Thanksgiving. Stay home, social distance, wear a mask in between bites of food. Right. This guy's been saying all this shit. And then he's doing, now you go see him eating at a restaurant. So does that mean, I mean, do we believe everything's about you got so that's a perfect example of, you know, a lot of things are motivated through politics and looks, you know what I'm saying? Everything that you see, not what, it's not really what you think it is. So how much, how much are you going to put into a person?


Like what their thoughts are? Yeah. Not much. What kind of person wants to do that? That's the problem? What kind of person wants to be a governor? Because they're not normal and you didn't care until the pandemic, when the pandemic rolled around, you realize, Oh, the mayor matters. It really matters who you are. No. And I think a lot of them like, like have drains of a certain amount of fame and want to be superstars. Yeah. Cause even though you say you do it for the people, you have to be likable or have some type of personality to connect with us And you're cultivating your act. They have an act to 100%. They have an act it's different than our act. Our act is to make people laugh. Their act is to get people to think that they're the person who's got the solution.


There's our leader is to lie. Yes, Man, Dave, you know what Joe, we're going through with all of this shit. And even with this last election, whoever you decided you liked, appreciate whatever. It was just so weird thing going on. It was a weird thing going on. And I was watching one of David Goggins posts and I have to say, David Goggins, I've never seen, nobody have worse feet than my feet. Oh, his feet are broken down. But he just got done running hundred 40 miles. I Know he was going to defend that. I was going to say the same thing, Joe. I know you're going to say, well, what has he done with his feet? And what have you telling me? So I know you were going to be like, you know how many mountains?


Those are fucking rock blisters, legitimate. I knew he was going to say that. And that's the point I was going to make it. That's a point I was going to make. He said Everybody. Yeah, Jesus Christ. Look at those big toes. Yeah. Those look like crazy. Like they've been through it. That is hilarious. Those, that thing on the left, he showed me that if you cut out like coach the right foot, big toe, right foot, his big toe. If you showed me a photo of that and didn't show me the rest of his foot, I'd be like, ah, that's like a snail or something. People would say another planet. People say that was my Foot. That's a Mars or Mars rock. But like just zoom in on just the toe. Don't show me anything.


But his right toe. That's a rock from Mars. That's not real. But That's fucking a lot of miles, Joe, That's a brain of steel that man has a brain of steel. That's the law. He knows how to force himself to do shit. That hurts. That's what he was saying. He said. And then whatever it is, he one thing about him, he always has to remind you that he was a fat piece of shit. Yup. It does it like that. Gotta be fat. Must be the number one motivated thing. God damn. So you didn't see the rest of it. You'd be like, what is that? Oh, that's a rock somewhere. That's on another planet. It's a satellite.


That's a satellite photo grows. This shit says satellite. Fuck. I know your thing. Like Jamie go closer. But the point he made son, he said, he said, everybody, I used to be a fat piece of shit. Yeah. He was 300 pounds. Yeah. I was 300 when I was a piece of shit. Everybody's looking for, I need to answer with this person. I need the heirs. That principal fucking, why don't you be the answer for yourself? Yeah. That's that's I know people like, well, that's easy to say, but why not find the answers? You need a life through yourself and through what you do, your hard work and a PR type of person and type of human type of fighter.


That's why people like him are so important because he'll tell you people like him are so important because he'll tell you, he used to have no discipline. Right? So like now this is not something he was doing. I got to interrupt. It's so funny. You said this is because I was having a coffee with Dave today. And then he said that about you because I was talking about, I can't drink no shit with my antibiotics. When I got shot and everything and had some kind of weight, we talked about you and that, and that's what he said. He said, I fucking love him. Respect is discipline. I do have some of that. Yeah. But I'm lazy too, man. I forced myself in all this stuff that I do. But It's you get challenged by something though? Something kicks you In the ass. Yeah. Well I don't, I don't like falling.


I don't like not doing what I'm supposed to do. So I force myself to do what I'm supposed to do, but it's never easy. It's not easy. You know? It's like, I always would think of disciplined people as being like a, there was no wavering. They just got up and did it. But that's the other thing Goggins tells you Was sometimes I'll stare at my shoes for 30 motherfucking minutes for put them pitches on. Cause you want to get rid of, look at a dumb, ugly ass. God damn. That's not what he's doing. He's talking about his worst time. Joe did the pivot. I just, I opened up my own story. Right. And after I just saw David Goggins feet, you got to help me get that. Look at that shit. So candles, no son.


You don't know about that. Like yo son that is Joe. Put a little on your hand. Please pull it on your hand. Smells good. That shit is vegan. It's all natural. It's fire sun. That's what you watch what I say, sir. Watch what I say. Nice. Watch how long that shit last, Joe. Okay. It feels good. I know it sounds weird. Look at that shit. That's the shit. Koreans are all on the back. I know you. Don't got your glasses. You have to read it. But it's like type of oils and coconuts. I never heard of in my life like coconut, coconut, a Google, all the black nuts oils, CBD sun. Kill me. I don't know what this stuff is. When I Mongo oil.


What is the Google? It Google it cool and mad. Rich. Butter's good, man. Yo, you laughing son. You're laughing. That shit is fire. I'm just laughing at Erica Badu. Put that shit on. Right? Erica Badu. Put that shit. Nah that's you, you listen. Every Erica Badu put that on son. And she started rubbing herself real, real slow. She hadn't been out in a pig pen begin in a while. And she was like, Hmm. She was like, is it edible? Wow. She wants to go. She really high. Are you disrespecting my product? Are you? I Was thinking about taking cream and eating it. I'd probably have to be pretty high. Certain people react to things differently, but it does Smell like food though.


It smells like a delicious book. But wait, it's like, it's like food. It's like food for your, your body. Your body is eating right now, Joe. And 100, a hundred milligrams of CBD. Yup. Look at my Google or there it is right there. CBD and hemp oil, cocoa butter. We got more the nuts. When did you start this business? How long have you started it? I've been working on the formula for two years. Look at that. I know that's my wife. I just say to classy ashy to classy. I tell it that's the feeling you have. Look at that. I like the sparkle Thing about a joke. I've been asked you my whole life. You know that. And for years people like you should do lotion.


You should do lotion. I'm like, man, it's, it's kinda corny. I mean, it could be an a D novelty. B could be funny. Yo ashy, Larry. He got his own lotion. And I was like, fuck, that shit did not met with this young lady. And she's like a chemist when it comes to this lotion shit and we start working on it. And then when I, when I finally tried, what was the end product? I was like, this shit really work. Like it really works and is good. It sounds like it's good for your muscles to have. It's good for everything. Your hands are going to thank me later. So I believe it. What is the name of the website? Donaire Rawlins. That's where you can get it opened up the stores. I like it. I like it. Look at you entrepreneurial. I never, this is one thing that came out of this, not just for me, Joe, for a lot of people.


Think about this, a person that makes their money on the road, a road, a real role coming. This happened to me. 95% of the money that I make is on the road. 95% of the shows I had are done. So the only thing I have from what I usually make is that 5%. And I didn't enough for shit. Right? And even though you can have some money stacked up or whatever, you still gotta, you gotta ask yourself what the fuck is going to be the pivot. I don't think the Pivot's going to come for a long time either. In terms of us being able to get back to work. No, no, no. We've got to go to work next summer. Next summer. You think Joe Darnell? Well, I'm not trying to say I don't believe in Corona right now, but we are on the track of not just detonate shit, but being able to have it under control.


We're about to get to the point where people are going to have more, such a security. You know what I'm saying? Just think about, think about the progress we've made in a year from when this shit first happened. You take a Corona test. We had to wait like seven days. Right? Think about it. When we first, when it first hit, we had to like, Oh my God, it was so scary. So scary. And then all these ventilators ventilators, ventilators. But if you know now, since when the pandemic started, yet, we still losing people, but you don't hear that ventilator talk too much. Well, ventilators are actually a bad idea. Now they realize, You know what I'm saying? It's like, figure it out. The whole podcast yesterday on COVID with Nicholas Christakis from Yale COVID nigga. He believes that COVID is a real problem. Yeah. Yeah. For sure.


I believe it. But I believe it is controlled controllable. It is controlled A bull. I think there's a, it's a multifaceted problem. And I think we're only handling one aspect of it, which is keep people from working. Keep people home, keep people. No, you can't do that. Treating people like they're children, you got to, this is what you got to do. This is what you gotta do. We gonna catch more creative ways to make money. Like, think about the comedy scene. When we thought like the only place that tells jokes was on a stage. And I was, I had some resentment towards some of those outdoor events, the parking lot, shit. For some, I saw one of those parking lot shows with horns. I was like, never give a heckler, an instrument to fuck your show.


I'm like, there's no way I'm going to these motherfuckers. Don't like me. There's no way I'm going to be ACRA. Yeah. Well we're happy to be out, man. It's a different experience. And then the point I was making is like you, you could suppress people. You can call them there for a certain amount of time, prepare time. But after a while, you're have to figure something out. My Point I was going to make is they're only looking at one side of it. They're not looking at telling people how to be healthy. There's no talk. Yes, nigga. That's what's up right? Son. You a strong motherfucker. All your niggas are strong. Jamie might be the least strong out of everybody. Stop Jamie. Ding off, man. Jamie, I'm not saying you're not strong.


I'm not saying I'm just saying I didn't forget about <inaudible> cliff. He's got a deadly three-pointer and he runs like Jamie's That's black shape. That's black people shape he's in. He does poems. That's black people shaped, run, play basketball to pull ups and pushups. You do like the jail workout. So Jamie's actually in good shape. I know. I believe I'm sorry, Jamie. I didn't mean to offend you he's back there. He doesn't talk. I know did what he did when he finally talking. It's like, yo, he finally talks. Jimmy shows someone show Him that video of you Duncan shooting Three pointers basketball done, dude.


It's impressive. No, you can't dunk. We're working on that shit. He's hitting 3.5 to three point or like rain man. There's something weird about him. Like he's got like there might, he might have a wire crossed it. I didn't know. You was nice. What I'm saying is to go back to your point, Joe is everybody's talking about the end of Corona, like Don lemon man, Don lemon man, Don limit sub four years for four years straight. He complained. He was mad at Donald Trump for four fucking years, four years. And I was like, man, if Donald Trump wins, this election, Don limit is going to jump off to CNN.


Do you remember all their faces? When he won last time when we won in 2016, they were all so depressed. Jake Tapper and all those people on TV. Just like mother. Fuck. I can't believe. Yeah, but here's the thing, Joe. I'm like, I don't think you're supposed to do that. If you're doing the news, just doing commentary, you can do that. I think if you're doing the news, you're supposed to say the news, Joe, let us figure it, Joe, Donna, Joe. That's why I do subscribe to the notion that fake news, like, to be honest, it's all fake. It's all of them are fake. It's all fake. And this is what I did. What I keep on telling people. It's like how I know you're upset. But when you're like, you you're, it's all personal.


Like everything has you to the heart. Like, Well that's where it gets weird. Those two guys, Chris Cuomo and Don lemon, both of them, they do this editorializing and this like it's, it's almost like they're doing a podcast and their opinion is all in it and their opinions in it. But It's also on the other side too, but it's Encrypted and they're doing it on a news channel. There's a lot going on. But that's why, if you don't then here's another thing about the media. If you didn't understand whatever party you agree with, whatever, If you don't understand how easy it is to manipulate the media joke, it is so, so simple To manipulate the media, to Manipulate the media and the people that listened to it, Manipulate people.


What do you mean by manipulate the media? Like you can create stories. You can create stories. You kids make things happen. I got shot niggas. I see, I got shot in my motherfucking thumb. That's what I heard. And a lot of people don't believe me. I believe you. I don't believe that you believe me. That's what I believe. Mother fucker. That's not convincing. But the point I'm making is like, when I got from when I first Got shot, Joe posted on Instagram, I didn't want to post the incident. Cause I know that I didn't want to get no war in the streets going on. People like going out and looking for the person that shot me in my thumb. So I kept it to myself. They didn't really bring it to me. People's attention. I posted one picture of me being in a hospital.


Everybody's like you okay? You okay? They don't know how, what I got shot for, but they're just, they instantly got connected to that story. Did you ever think of non posting it? I did. What made you decide to post it? The world needs to know The world needs to know some of the gigs I had to postpone when I was locker. Shut up. Now I'm locked up and you're not saying it's like, yeah, I wasn't ready to share to the world. And I didn't know how my friends was going to take it. Okay. Then I wanted to be transparent, to be honest, to let them know I got shot. That's what I did. You know? I see you feel like you still don't believe it. I do believe you. I think you're just looking for a very specific reaction from me.


I gave that up a long time. I gave it up. I was like, whatever. That was what made me nervous. The first time I came up, I'm like, what the fuck do I say? Say what you say, nigga, don't try to all right. I'm here. You are here. But Are you thinking about bailing out of LA yet? I think so. Yeah. A lot of people are the reason that we've started feeling when we don't, well, you don't really need Hollywood like that. You know? I don't think anybody needs it anymore. Some people thought they did you're right. Some people thought they did. They thought it was like, you had to be here every night. I thought I needed to be there for a long time.


And then once what happened this situation, then you realize, Oh, what can I do? You're like, wait a minute. I really can make my own community. Yes. I can make my own community. Not only that you get connected to all the other communities like and all the other podcasts, we all help each other. We're all together. I will say one, one thing white people do when it comes to podcasts, they support it. Yeah. We support each other. But you know what, man, that's a new thing because in radio it was the opposite when they had radio data attack, each other, like I remember Opie and Anthony was always at war with Howard stern and you know, Jay Lana was always at war with all the other late Night talk show hosts. And Did that make people engage?


Do you think that made people engage with their platforms more? No. No. They were just, they were just scared because they only had like back in the day, when you were on television or the radio, you had a very specific time slot. You had 6:00 AM to 10:00 AM, right? Dayparts and other people are also on, at 6:00 AM to 10:00 AM and no one's recording anything. So you have to listen to it live. I was a part of television. I was a part of that. I don't know if I was a part of when hot 97 was the biggest and urban radio in New York was the biggest. And then I was, I was doing radio, wind power, one Oh five came and became the competitor. They had no competition at first. You know, it was just them. Then they got challenged. And that with that's what made for interesting, interesting shit between both of them.


It's like, yeah, we talked shit about 97.1 97.5. Didn't want to fuck. Then you start listening to both of them to see what shit they're talking. You could do that if you them or you could listen. And if you'd like it tell people it's good. That's what podcasts is too. Like if I'm listening to your show, I'll tell people, Tonto Rollins shows hilarious or listen to this guy or listen to her, listen to what I'll tell people, people that don't even fucking know. Man. I tell people about podcasts that I listened to from NPR or a fucking radio lab. What? I always tell people because I'm interested in cool shit. I want to know about cool shit. And if I find cool shit, I want to tell other people about cool shit.


Well, they they're worried about if they talk about something else, I'm going to take opinions. It's going to take attention away from them. That's what's called famine thinking. You can never them famine, famine, famine, feast, or famine. I'm a feast thinker. I always think there's enough for everybody. Everybody come aboard. I want everybody to be happy. I want everybody to make money. I want everybody to be famous. I want everybody to be happy. I want them to be fulfilled. I don't want to be the man. I, that that idea of being the man is to me is ridiculous. That's what I did. But then y'all set up when you do stuff like that, for some people in their perception of you, that's what makes you the man. That's what makes you, if you're able to inspire and motivate that's what makes you the man that, you know, you say, you know, Well, I'm happy that if that's the case that people think that way, but I know it I'm in a position to be generous.


So They know it. They don't hold it against you too. It feels good to be generous, but they hold it against me. People that don't like me, They hold it against you. That I have that. I have you on people that don't like me. They'll still hold it against me because they're like, Oh, because like there is a podcast, Jamie, Jamie, exactly what he talked about. No. What are you talking about? They'll tell me like, you don't know you. Yeah. But like some people, they told me they wasn't going to like you anymore because you liked me. Good luck. They said they wasn't going to like you because you Didn't. But that's ridiculous. Anybody who thinks like that is out of Their fucking mind. It was like, they was saying shit like this and I'll read the comments, Joe.


They were saying shit like this. They shit like, well, Joe was right up to this point. Y'all ain't like you had a track record. Like yeah. I believe everything said until he got loud. Here's the thing. I don't think anybody will ever understand the comradery that we all have. Right. Comics have it's a different world. But the podcast world is totally different. Y'all motherfuckers. Yo y'all motherfuckers. It's just like, but man, the pockets world is so fucking dope. And the podcast world was ready for the pandemic podcasts. People was like this pandemic. I get to spend more time on my kids. I get more time with my kids And you get to spend more time doing podcasts because everybody's free.


Even if you have to do those stupid zoom podcasts, you're still spending more time doing podcasts. Yeah. But it's like, you figured out, like they knew it was going to happen before it fucking happened. I came in right at two. Well I think I came in right at the right time. I don't think they knew it was going to happen before it happen. But I think they got lucky. They got lucky that there look, man, back when I was a, just dependent upon Hollywood and gigs, I'd be fucked right now. I'd have no income coming in Future to sun. You. I said this to you before, like when you hear like Joe Rogan, you hear about the Spotify deal and you hear about all this type of shit, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And then you, what you don't understand. Like I said, Joe, everybody wants to be you right now, but nobody wants to be you when people were saying no and equipment was breaking down and we didn't know if we was going to do it.


Well, the thing is I never, I didn't think about it that way. I didn't think like, I know this is going to blow up. I thought I liked doing this. I'm going to keep doing it. Continue to have fun. Just do what I like. Right. All the shit that I do. If you think about it, I just do what I like. Whether it's standup comedy or whether it's UFC commentary or whether it's doing a podcast. I do what I like. I do what I like. I don't think, Oh, if I do this, it's going to be huge. I just do what I like Powering thing that is so hard. That's the most empowering thing that is so hard for people to feel comfortable enough to do it because the turn it in, turn it into money. This motherfucker says, fuck bitches all the time. You know what I'm saying? They, Kevin figured out a way to get a w nine or anything for it.


They get nervous about the future too. You gotta, you gotta have enough confidence in yourself to take chances That there are a lot of pussies out here. There's a lot of posts out country. Pussy. Our country has a lot of pussy in it because it's too easy to get by. And it's human nature to become soft when, when things are easy and when you're in any sign of any kind of struggle whatsoever, that's when the real pussies emerge because they can't handle any pressure Or a goal. Well, you Leave them. You see how bad they are because they fall apart. Any adversity at all, anything. But this is beyond that now because of the, It's not beyond that.


Now, Joe, the reason why it's beat on it, this is the fact that this is a personality trait or just as a side of not to say that I'm a fan of Donald Trump or anything, but it was certain things that I could understand where the thought comes from. But how you articulate to people is all fucked up. The way he articulated it to people is like certain hair. Certain people need filters. Certain people need like Kanye West needs interpreter. You know what he needed. He needed a coach. Cause someone coached him for that second Biden debate. Right? If you watch that second Biden debate, he was calm and cool at Biden, work himself up and stammer and lie about shit. And he treated, he had still attacked him, but he attacked him in a different way. The first time he did it, he was obnoxious. He kept talking over him.


He didn't let him talk. It was ridiculous. Everybody wanted to shut his mic off, but then someone must've coached him for this. Or he realized himself to take a different approach. I'm gonna tell you, I'm going to tell you something different, whatever numbers you say, the loser of this election, still one breaking a record. I know isn't that crazy. Second place still was second place. The first place, any other time in history where this shit is and everything That's nuts that shows everybody realize it's important to find. When you, when you realize that a guy like Donald Trump can become president, you realize, Oh my God, it's actually important to vote. Yo bro. You know, it has to, until you see those numbers, yo, it was like, it was crazy.


It was like certain places separated by 5,000 votes. I know 10,000 votes is tight and you can say, you can make it. There's a thing. You can make an argument. It could have went either way. Here's man, Donald Trump, let it be known that he didn't give a fuck about anybody, but his base. Yeah, that'd be much. That's it. And I'm not saying if, if it's a numbers game, understand that like there's a certain amount of people to help you. We'll help you get elected. There's a certain amount of people. That's why you have strategists and shit.


They'll be like, if we do this, we get these robo Carl's here and everything, you know, it's a science to that. There's certain people that can help you get there. You know, if he, but he never made, Like if he softened his approach up, I think the base would not have appreciated. It. That's the numbers it's like, love him or hate him. It's very polarized To hate him works for right. For a situation. Whereas Biden, I don't think people love Biden. Something has to be, I don't think they're disliked, but they hate Trump. The people that voted for Biden hate Trump, most of, or just feel like we just can't do this anymore. That's the people that voted for Biden, hatred, But they're not excited about him the way they were excited about Obama or excited about Clinton or excited about a million other presidents in the past done a million.


Yeah. But for the most part, every time it switched over is because somebody goes totally opposite of what was going on A little bit of that. But it's usually bullshit. You know what I mean? It's bullshit, man. But I'm like, man, these old stories, these old stories that they're repeating over and over again, Biden is filling up his cabinet with all these billionaire hedge fund peoples like not hedge fund people, buying environment. It's like the, the guy that is involved in an environmental, he just, just hired some guy to be upset about. I don't know what color is. I was reading about the That's important to me because he Work for a fucking oil company. The black part is important to me.


An environmental advisor was taking money from fossil fuel companies and they're like, Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey, Hey, this guy has ties to fossil fuels and you're doing something with him that involves the environment. There could be a conflict of interest. That's what I'm saying. If he's a black guy. Okay? Yeah. It was find out. We'll find out right now. I bet they probably listen. This is, I think they're probably going to hire a lot of Republicans. I really do. I already started a black guy. They're going to, they're going to hire a lot of people that want to listen. And in their defense they probably think some radical things need to be done to kickstart the economy right now. I agree. I agree. But I don't know how they're gonna be able to work together.


I think they're all dirty, bro. They all work together. Here he goes. Biden just appointed his climate. I Told you son, It's a fossil fuel industry. Ally. Yeah, there he is. Let's look at black and shit. That's all I need, Joe. There you go. He raked in big money from fossil fuel industry while waiting to help oil and gas com or voting rather to help oil and gas companies look at His greeting. Them is different. Look he's, it's like yes, Knuckles. Hey fella. My motherfucker is a video of Lindsay Graham and Kamala Harris, fist bumping each other. It's adorable. Calming the hair, reaching across the aisle.


That that was a good move. Walking by fist bumps. Well, she's the only good move she's strong. You know, she was a district attorney. She got some questionable arrests on hers. There's some shit that she did just presenting people and keeping them in prison to use them as the fight, wildfires and shit. But I, in my community, I've heard people talk about her and everything. Like why don't she? You, you, you have trusted her. You believe in her. What I did believe in was when she got elected to be the first female vice president, first black, black president within a couple of days to commercials I've seen on different urban platforms or just period, it's been, you'll see a little black girl, right.


Looking up to something, You know, wait to see that shadow with her standing there and a little black girls in the shadow. Yeah. Black girls in shadow. But the little girls are just showing it's like this. They feel, they feel, yeah. They feel black girl joy. They see something. She also, you know, she didn't know. She just, but she didn't do just bad things. She did a lot of good things. She prosecuted a lot of child sex predators, a lot of pieces of shit, a lot of bad people. She, it, wasn't just, I fuck with it situations where people Should have been let out of jail and weren't, but there's also like, this is the thing that we have to realize when it comes to district attorneys and just attorneys and prosecutors and defense attorneys in general, they're trying to win a game and it gets dirty. When I tell you what my key people that you haven't yet, but I'm sure you will.


Sorry. When somebody you're trying to people or defend people, the people defend people they know are fucking guilty and they'll keep shit from the prosecution. Even though they know they're defending a guilty person, they do it all the time. So people prosecute people that they're not sure are guilty. And they'll pretend they're sure that that person's guilty because they want to win. And they'll withhold information that could potentially exonerate that person because they're playing a game. When you let people play a game, anytime you let people play games and someone's trying to win, they cheat. They try to figure out a way to do better than you with, with influence, by withholding things, by holding things back, they know this judge they're tight with this lawyer.


They try to win a game. You've made it a game. So you got a prosecutor and you've got a defense attorney. So you've got two competing forces. You're always going to have lies 100% because people play games. So that was the business she's in. But it's just a business. It's her business. That's her business. And they are a business of words. Like you're saying, there's no laws. How do I win? Particularly laws, but laws are the word. How do I win with these words right here? Right? No matter what you think, how do I win with this? Come on Kamala. You know, that's not right. We're not talking about right. We're talking about what we could prove. And that's what law is all about, right? That is, if you are a defense attorney, that's your job is to protect someone and try to get them off.


Even if they might be guilty. And if you're a prosecutor, your job is to prosecute somebody you're not, your job is not to go, Hey, we might be wrong. Your job is not to go. Hey, let's hope. But the shady shit is when you don't play by the rules and you withhold information or, or withhold evidence and P people have done that in the past. And that's when things get real squirrely. Because like, okay, now you're not playing the game. You're using your unfair advantage. <inaudible> no, it doesn't surprise me. But what I'm saying is it doesn't make a person all bad. Right? But she's not all bad. Like she's done a lot of very good things. I read an article about all the different things she did, including the different things that she did, that a lot of people thought were bad. Like threatening moms, threatening moms with, they would go to jail if their son was truant, but it turns out no one ever went to jail.


It was a threat. And obviously it's terrifying to be a single mom and think you might get put in jail because your son is just running around and doesn't show up at school because you've worked two jobs trying to put food on the table, but nobody ever actually did get arrested and got, went to jail. Let me too hard to prove that shit, man, there's some people. And in some cases, some people art, and I don't know if this was the case. Some people are too lazy in certain situations too. Well, I'm saying this is not a good idea to threaten a mother because she's a single mom trying to get by. And her son is not going to school. It's not good to threaten her with jail time. But sometimes people make decisions. Yeah. Sometimes people make decisions like drastic decisions like that. And maybe at the time they had a perspective that's different than the perspective that they have now, This called evolution.


I want everybody To have, look, I want them to have a clean slate. Biden. Harris are in there now. I think clean slate. Forget about, but let's see what can see what they can do. The best thing is the people they put into office. Although the cabinet let's give them a chance. We want them to do well. This is what was so fucked up about Trump being in office. <inaudible> exactly. So many people hated him. They really would rather the country do bad for him because if the country was killing and under him, he was like, look at the candidate. I'm the best I told you that everybody's like, fuck. At least maybe, please, even Trump supporters going to this one with a different attitude. Let's let's all together.


Say we want the best for America. What's in, what's done is done the election's over. Maybe you were a Tulsi Gabbard fan like myself. Maybe you like Bernie Sanders like myself, but maybe you like fucking gem, gash, Django. I love yang gang. I love Andrew Yang. He's a, he's an awesome guy. I love a lot of his, But for now we know where it is. What's Biden Harris. What's up niggas, man, Joe, no motherfucker. Trump, Trump, Trump. And you got different level of Trumpers. Now there's a lot of people that there's some mad as a motherfucker don't want to hear shit, son. The problem is he's telling them that it's a rigged election. He's telling him this was election. But part of the problem is all elections have some corruption.


They just fucking do Not enough for you to say nigga leave when you leave it, nigga. I don't think there's a keeping secrets and shit, Joe. Well, Mike Baker, who used to be in the CIA was on Baker. Are you a Baker? Mike? His name is Mike Baker. He was in the CIA. And he came on the podcast recently. He was telling me that even if they did overturn it, even if they did rather like find corruption, the amount of votes you're talking about in most of these States, not enough. It's not enough. Not nearly enough, but it would have to be. Yeah, like he's talking these Buffalo talking about five or six people bro. And that's the petty stuff. No, no it's not five or six people. They they've.


I think they uncovered. They uncovered to fit different things today in, I want to say it's Michigan where they found a memory card that had more votes for Trump than Biden, but it's still, it was close. So it was like 1000 for Biden in 1000, a few hundred for Trump, like four or 500 for Trump. We get the memory card from sir. I do not know. Come on. I think there's a lot of go to board up any memory card. So motherfuckers going to get memory cards. Who's counting votes, got the memory card from the machine, Told you that story. This is in the news, which news outlet It was in three or four different ones that I say all say the same thing. Well, they all said that there was a memory card that was discovered and they showed the counts in the card.


But they've also found like other ballots that didn't get counted yet. There's just a lot of disarray. You're dealing with human beings that are counting millions of votes, counting a lot of them, just paper, they're getting mail and they're opening it up and they have to find out, I understand this is what I understand, Joe. This was so funny. It kind like backfired, right? That the male in volts is what killed truck. That's what they're saying. Yeah. For the most part. And the funny thing about it, Trump has the type of following that he literally could tell them to do anything. They're going to do it. He told motherfuckers not to mail in. Yeah. Well he wanted to make a point coming in in person. Well, this is the house You make a joke, answers the question. How do you make that point?


Understand making that point when you're not in the middle of a fucking pandemic, you know what I'm saying? Like that, that would've been a great argument in 16, especially for old folks, right? For anybody that wants to participate. But the only thing that would stop them is if they're going to go outside and risk their lives, right? So you're not thinking to give that person an opportunity to be a part of it. And that's the part that kind of fun. Well, I don't know if he, he definitely wanted people to vote in person, but did he ever encourage people to vote by mail as well? Or was he saying that mail was going to get a fraud? This whole shit was crowds. I'm like nigga, doc, somebody secret service break the secret, tell this motherfucker, yo, somebody tell this motherfucker that the Corona is out here.


He caught it. He knows it was out there. This nigga caught it right and gave all the secret service. It secret service cases that because they see your service, they got to keep it a secret. Sure. They're young and healthy too. They probably shook it off. Pretty easy. Probably got the same medicine he got. You know, The medicine is probably a lot of that medicines call your immune system, being up to par as much as like everybody's talking about this shit. It's the lazy route. No one wants to say Just a little bit of that. But they also gave him a bunch of experimental shit. They gave him these, this antibiotic antibody, blood transfusion medication. They gave him, what was it called? Regeneron. Is that what it's called? Jamie? They gave him some other, I don't know if it's experimental or if it's like recent recently been released, they gave him that, that medication.


They gave him a steroid. They gave him a bunch of different things all at once. So he got a cocktail shit that made him feel great. Not only that, how much is that cocktail? That's not easy. It's not cheap. And he wants that to be able to be given to everybody. But I don't know if that's feasible at the moment. Let's say to make those doses. Well, it's not just to make the money just to make the doses like say if they have all that medication and all the, all that blood antibody medication and all this different stuff, they're going to give him the steroids to make that for 300 million people. That's so many people. So if everybody gets sick, you have a dose. If have we have one dose for every human being in this country, even if you have one dose for half of, none of your is right, it's all You would need three, A hundred million vials of this shit.


That's so much, you're not going to need all of those. And probably more than They wouldn't even make that number of Joe. They wouldn't even make that number for every, for everybody to get one, they would make that number. It's got to be that number is going to be broken down by, okay, what's the criteria to get this? Well also it would be how many people do we really want to get it to? Because how many people are going to be sick at any one given time? It's probably never going to be more than 25% of the population. It's hard. But even if it comes out, Joe motherfuckers, I'm telling you, the certain motherfuckers are not taking that vaccine for whatever reason, black communities, they not niggas ain't fuck with no vaccine to this like iPhone. So you need the third one, no black person is going to take it.


I think there's a lot of people that are not going to take it. But I think what they think is a herd immunity. Once we get to 50% of the people that took it, the virus will probably die off. I think it's going to be in that neighborhood of 50% of the people that had it. If they, if, if either 50% of the people either have had COVID or have the vaccine for COVID, they think we're going to hit a herd immunity in a mostly die off, but it could always kick back in again. That's what they're worried about. That it's going to be like the common cold or the flu every year. Just like a vaccine. Yeah, for sure. If it works. Yeah. If it's been proven that it works and I talked to doctors and they explained what the science is and how it works. And then I talked to people that have taken it and they say, you know what? The side effects are because with the COVID vaccine, I think the side effects are, you feel like shit for a couple of days Who can't deal with this shit for a couple of lamps.


Are you where you need, you can't lose two days. Yeah. Yeah. I would definitely do it if I thought it was safe. I don't know enough about it right now to say that. I think, I mean, that was one of the things that Nicholas Christakis was talking about yesterday. He was talking about the potential dangers of the vaccine. And I appreciate that he brought that up because it's such a sensitive area for people. They think that if you think there's a danger in any kind of vaccine, you're some sort of anti-vaxxer now there's a potential for danger of any medication. When you're dealing with mass numbers of human beings, if you have 300 million people and you give them aspirin one, you know, I don't know what percentage, but some people are going to die from aspirin or they're going to get really sick from aspirin. This the same with everything substances you put in people's bodies, everybody reacts differently.


People die from fucking Brazil, nuts. You know, there's some, The motherfuckers want to waste some of these home remedies and shit, man. They were home remedies. I mean, they're cool for some people, but eventually man, you gonna have to talk to somebody. Yeah. For sure. With your, if you've got a real disease, you know, if you, the people that want to cure like cancer by not going to a doctor like Whoa, they can fix it. Now there's a lot of cancers. Not all of them, of course, but there's a lot of can't you're way better off having cancer. Now with modern medicine than you were having 15, 20 years ago, that's said all that remedy shit, all that like the best remedy for all this, besides the medicine, if you actually get sick, so fucking take care of yourself.


Right? That's what I'm hoping people get out of this. <inaudible> yeah. I don't understand. I don't understand how you could ignore that because It's convenient. As long as you're not sick, you don't think you're going to get sick. You stay home. If you don't have to go anywhere, you just stay home. And a lot of people just, they just stop exercising. They stop eating. Well, they stop drinking water and they fucked her body up. And then if something does it, you don't realize how much of a difference it makes and being healthy and not being healthy. When something hits you, a virus hits or hits you, you see like when, when I got shot, sir, there you go. I had to get the IV. I had to get the fucking IV antibiotics. Well, you guys get IVs all the time.


You're always doing a vitamin IVs on tour. Fight, afloat, fight them. That's such a good move. It is when we did that, the first, that was the first time I'd ever done that. Well real vitamin Ivy. Yeah. I mean I'm baby. I'd done. Yeah, But you got, you was born at heart. Everything open. You was like, give me what right here, half your ass. I'm like what you got? Yo B12 shot my ass. And I saw your ass. I was sitting right there. I was like, I was like, nigga, take that shit across the street. He got his fucking stomach out his ass out. I was like, I'm not scared. I know you're not. Yeah. Well the, the glutathione was amazing.


That stuff is great. The vitamin drip was amazing. We started getting them every week. We ha we've slacked off though. Once we got here to Texas, we haven't been doing it in Texas. That motherfucker I'm telling you about when I did yellow Springs just summer. That was probably one of the things that made that experience. So amazing is that we were living in our own bubble and playing by our own rules and everybody was having a good time. And it was all productive. Yeah. You guys put on a lot of shows, adult summer camps. Yeah. It was like, the shows are one thing. But the thing that was great for me was just the whole sense of community.


You know what I'm saying? Like we would have potlucks and shit and then I would have all the Housewives of yellow Springs. Like let's send yo dope motherfuckers out there. Don't motherfucker, yellow Springs, chicks, wives. They won't get upset with anything, but a casserole dish, son, like they was looking for a Rachel Ray Castro. This I had for like a week, they was stalking where I was living in everything. But the sense of community man is like in this one coffee shop, dinos, everybody go, there is one grocery store. It's just one of everything. That's mice. And it was so simple. Well, that's better really than this. This there's real good things about cities. But the thing that's missing is that camaraderie, that sense of community nature, city slickers, they were calling me a city slip.


So the videos that you and the river, you guys are Yo Joe, it was the widest greatest adventure of the summer. I became the River nigga. That's the original name? I'll tell you the truth, sir, but yo, yo listen so peaceful. I am at peace. Listen, Joe. I first The, the, the quote there forever mood river bitches. <inaudible> I'm talking about bitches. Farmer's market bitches. I'm dealing like, love me dog, like women with rescue dogs.


Great picture, man. Jamie. Good. Look how peaceful I was son. I was a river. I had to change the name. Look at that picture. Framed. I need that picture. Let's let's get that picture printed on steel. Who took the photo? Photograph Rico. Federico. Did I tag them? Yeah. Where's Ferris. Get ahold of Frederico. We need that picture in the studio. He's such a talented fucking producer and Everything beautiful. But that would be a great picture to frame in here. Yo, I fell in love. Joe People think it's a river. Like the first chair. Are you going to let me describe me. Yeah. First thing, When we came up with Joe, it was really naked.


Right. And I liked that for the streets. Right. But people was like, I don't know if we could put that on t-shirts they're looking at it from a market brand to the employee. Right. And I was like, okay, Ninja. You know what I mean? But he's inspired by the river nigga, but ninjas for TV, There's many layers to the story. Many layers to it. Do you fish a fish? Did you go fishing at all? When you guys are done? I a good chance to go fishing there. But this was me at a river. And Jordan Changes your mind. Right? It's everything changes your mind when you buy a waterfall, you're like, Oh, there's something about these natural things. Like Nature, nigga, nigga nature, nature free his shit son. Yep. It's good for you.


Look at me. Let me tell you. I know exactly. They said, when did I, when did I turn into a river nigga? Right? They say, when did I turn? When do I remember the change? Right? It was, when was that waterfall, man? That's crazy. Yo, let me tell you the story. So when we were out there, Chappelle wife used to make these events and it's family walk down. I'm like, man, fuck that. I'm from the streets. I'm not doing all that stupid shit. She had all these days, like every day had a, got them a venture or a star what's today. You got to look at the little brochure and shit. And then one day she did one and was kayaking. Right? And I went on his kayak and it was me and my man, Patrick he's in yellow spring.


He's a net y'all spring, native, whatever. And we were going down the river, Matt river. I had a kayak, he had a kayak, we was smoking a joint and we just hear nature. It's like just straight nature. Right? And then he said, man, you know what? This reminds me of. He said, this reminds me of when I was younger, building ramps, jumping ramps on my bike and me a fish for crawdads with my dad. That was like, nigga, this remind me of looking for my dad. His stories. There's two stories were totally opposite. It represented one thing for him, memories he had with his dad. For me, it represented memories. I didn't have with my dad and the memories I wanted to create with my son.


You know what I'm saying? When I was out there at Joe, all up things like I got to bring this little motherfucker to the river, to the river, he's got to be out here. He's got friends out there and my son came out there in the summer was beautiful. But one thing was missing. No matter how you're celebrating in life, right? If you're not sharing it with your family, it feels weird. It feels like, Aw, man, I don't even know if it's fair for me to have as much fun. And the, although how great the sun was going. When he came out, he was hanging with me on the river and shit, man. It was like the best shit ever. Son. We were skipping. Jamie. You're not to skip rocks. Do you not to skip? Yeah. It's in the wrist.


Right? I was in the boy Scouts. Yo don't say you're the boy Scouts today site. Why they might've played with your booty hoes? Yo, it's a lot of man. Don't tell me, don't be proud of the boys. Go pick another division. So not the boy scout, But we would never happen to my booty hole. I had a great time hanging out with a bunch of criminals. That's what you do in the boy Scouts. We were skipping rocks. Like yeah. Yeah. I didn't know it was that much precision. It depends on the rock. Like you really want a nice flat rock. You get on a flat rock. You can do some wild shit. When we were going out every day, Talib, Kweli, right? He thinks he's a river nigga.


Right? He told us one day I could skip any rock. You know what he said? Anyway, he said, no matter how big it is, I can skip any rock. That doesn't seem likely. That's the fucking Brooklyn cockiness he had right there. It's just like, it was like the next time we went, he wants to challenge me in rock skipping. Again. This time this motherfuck was pulling rocks out of his shoes, Shorts. He had rocks with him already. He prepared Joe. He came rocks. He came with all perfect flat river rocks. Oh, that's crazy. He didn't bend over Championship of a rock skipping. It seems like people would take it super seriously.


I think it would. I think it's something to think. I'm pretty sure it's done somewhere. Never thought about it to this moment, but I'm sure there's gotta be a competition or rock skipping competition. And they got groupie bitches. Like yo, the girls It's off season for bowling really go after rock scuppers. Yeah. We heard you had a tin skipper last week. A skipper could get you a blowjobs. That's what gets you so wild? If you looking for what do a 10 skipper suck. You know what wop is, right? I do. Who educated you too, because I don't think no disrespect to your hip hop or whatever. I don't someone introduce to wop. I don't know. Might've been Jamie. Was it? You Could be Because of the Ben Shapiro video.


Oh, that's right. That's right. That's right. Yeah. Because Ben Shapiro, Ben Shapiro was like, you know, wants to people's cell phone. They don't realize they're self owning. Right. When you know the song is about wet ass pussy. He's like, well that sounds like I kind of collage nickel condition. I was like, what? But that's not the point. I know the point is, but I understand that. That's like, that's an that's I understand this point. That's an abnormal amount of moisture. Yes. Tech be able to come up with a whole song about it. It's like, it's a level. What do you think would happen if you came out with a song called hard-ass Dick? I want to do it would not be received that well as with, as minimal controversy as well, Certain songs gotta be answers, right?


Like answers to a song. Whereas pussies, K Michelle at a song, you can't change a man. Right. And I flipped it and did a song called you can't raise a bitch. You can't save a bitch. That was the name of the song. Can't save a bitch. Everyone needs to have songs. And then they would have answer songs. And then like, there's been a bunch of those right. Where they would, someone would have a song. And then someone like someone would have a response song to that song. Scrubs. Yeah. Had scrubs was then they had another one. It was, I can't remember. But I know I saw you standing in the rain. Wasn't there. One of those orange juice Jones. So when they were an answer, if I know any orange juice Jones, if I know any answer to that, I just immediately told her, Oh, damn it.


To know orange juice Jones and how cool he was. Orange juice. Jones was the shit. That song was the best at a time. That was our original kind of song. They never had a song to total the whole story of getting done wrong like that. Especially it didn't tell him in the rain. Right. Like everybody knows that story, but you followed this couple in the rain. Yeah. And then at the end, when he <inaudible> yeah. That's a bitch. Get out of here. He had his credit cards and everything. Yeah. That was a song that made people happy. I came over here. I'm not selling shit, but You got more stuff.


Yup. Look you remember this right? Remember my black Ash, right? Yes. All right here. Thank you. We kept the other one in California. Cause we weren't sure if we're going to be going back. Yeah. You got that one. Look at this one right here. There's some holes in his house. Candle. That's for the holiday. It's a ho, ho ho pose like H O E there's some holes in this house. Candle. That's okay. Yo, that's a look at this window, Joe. Cause I fell in love with yellow spring. That's one of my tops. Oh, yellow spring candle from the streets, The creeks from the hood to the woods. From horse to oars, from Adidas to TIVA son. I got a whole store. Boom. And this for the white chicks out there. Cause I got a lot of white bitches up. Didn't it.


Okay. Karen candle. Imagine if your name was Karen and you were fine for like 30 years, Joe, there's more look at this. That's the sudden you turn into the home shopping network. That's what I wanted to avoid Joe. But at the same time, at the same time I opened up an online store and it's doing well. Okay. Do you have a website that we can just put up on the screens to the library and all these objects out one after another? Well you call it. No, listen. Oh, you have like a little thing you scan with the phone Objects. I don't call it objects products, man. Give me my back, man. What is it? If it's not a product? No. Just if you don't want them joking, you're going to use them.


I'll definitely use them. All right. I like candles. Those are good too. And they're soy too. They're soy. Yeah. And they're hand port in the U S I don't do anything with soy. It's a candle, man. Don't disrespect that people one day Soy is like a political fruit or vegetables. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. People call you a soy boy. If you're a Republican people call a weak men, soy boys. That's like a, it's an insult. I never knew that. Soy is one of the rare foods that's actually attached to being a bitch. That's a pussy food. Yeah. Like if you're, if you're a guy who's really into soy and this is not my perspective, this is just, I just think it's a fucking, it's a plant.


It doesn't matter to me. Right. It's a, isn't that at a mommy is not soy. Like when you have edamame a, at a Japanese restaurant, isn't it? Sorry. Yes. Yeah. Is that, is that the case? Jamie? The first time I ever tried a mommy, I was so ghetto. I used the whole thing and I was like, I was like, my throat was killing me. Son's part is the outside. I didn't know anything about it. Goddamn salt and everything. And the outs of sea salt, some sea salt. I didn't have a bowl of just add a mommy. It takes away from it. You wouldn't even want it. It's the whole process. It's the whole process of like ripping Sleeve. Edamame beans are whole immature. Soy beans sometimes referred to as vegetable, vegetable type soybeans.


They're green and different color for regular soybeans, which are typically light Brown, tan or beige. Yeah. So it's a soy. I like it a moment. I don't mind soy, but a lot of people think of soy as being like a bitch food. I never knew that. I thought it was a healthy, I mean, I knew that it's not the most masculine food, but I thought it was like, you step your game up. When you enter the, at a mommy lane, it's like, Oh shit, this motherfucker eat at a mommy. Now There's a reason. I think soy lowers your testosterone. Estrogens. Yeah. Yeah. Solely ISO flavonoids can provoke produce estrogen, like activity in the body mimicking the effects of natural estrogen. Yeah. But I think you can grow titties off of soy. Not quite, but it might feminize you.


It might feminize you fucks plants, affect your, your hormone. Do you know? They, they actually develop testosterone like synthetic testosterone for wild yams. Like plants. Yeah. From wild yams. Yeah. That's how they, that's how they developed some artificial testosterone or exotic. I almost figured that would be part of the whole sightless Cialis and blue pill era. That's a different thing though. That's just blood flow. That's nitrous. So why is nobody promoting wow. Oxide, nitrous? What is, what is it? Nitric, nitric oxide. That's like a N O explode. All those pump things you do when you want to get jacked with lifting weights.


A lot of those, those supplements, they mimic the same sort of effect. Just not to the same degree as like Finasteride, like add like Viagra and Cialis and shit like that. But they don't, they don't make, you have more testosterone with these like soybeans. And I, I th I think really for it to affect your hormones, I think it's just like, it can, it's a FA it's a possibility like chemically, but in order to actually do it, I think you'd have to eat some fucking preposterous number of soybeans. I don't think, No, I don't think anybody really has To worry about, but I think it's just a stereotype. I didn't even know that. The thing just odd for me, I didn't even notice stereotype boys.


I didn't know that. I thought it was like, like you evolve, evolving as a foodie. You know, like the first time I had, I was like, Oh shit. Y'all niggas don't know about the ETA mommies. Cause I was introduced to somebody else to it, but I didn't know that it's symbolized being a pussy. It doesn't, it's silly. It's the people are silly. Tastes good. Tastes good if they do it right. Put a little chili powder and salt on the outside. I like it with just CSO. I like a TESOL too. I'm working at a stadium. Joe, are you really? What are you doing? RFK stadium. Where's that in Washington DC. When you're doing that Thanksgiving weekend. Oh yeah. It's not the stadium. It's the parking lot. Right? You doing like an outdoor show?


I'm doing an outdoor show. Just Like the ones that Burt's been doing. Yeah. But Not at that level. Yeah. I talked to Bert about that. Shout at the bird and shout out to the cab bird is the guy Roll off people. Aren't giving him enough credit. He's the, these, the OJI of drive-through show. Yeah. It was like, it fit right into his whole shit. Burke toured through the entire pandemic doing drive-throughs. And I was saying to my driver, is this like a throwback Thursday or whatever? He was like this. And then the name of what was the summit? What was the name of the tour? The hot summer tour. I'm like this motherfucker, but he created the bubble and he fucking did it. Bubble stayed drunk entire summer and enjoyed it. Had a good time. I've done RFK stadium. It's the original stadium for the, for the Washington Redskins, the Washington Redskins, just to do that beautiful.


But for nine years, that was my traditional show at the DCM prov. I would do Thanksgiving weekend. It was a good time for me. Cause I got to see my family. I got to work. That's a great club too. So great. That DCM prov is one of the 10 greatest clubs in the country. And It's been probably the most consistent for 25 Years. So good. It's just the perfect size. Perfect. Everything about it's perfect. Yeah. And they get every year solid it's I don't even know that a comic can do bad in terms of ticket sales there, everybody seems to do well. At least the longer they have, They book good lineups. Like when a club's got that much prestige, they've been around that there's certain clubs like comedy works where people just trust them. You know, there's a bunch of helium in Philly, but we'll just trust them.


This going to be a good show. They're not going to book any scrubs. Right. And that's, that's how the DC improv has felt like they've developed a community. And I put for nine years, I saw my son from I'm the first time I took him up, it was just him and my arms. And then the next time he was kind of like crawling the next time he was walking. And then he walked his stage. I had like four years of pictures of his growth there. And then because of the pandemic, I thought the weekend was gone. I'm like, damn, that blows her tradition. And then they pivot. They made a pivot from the DCM prov to partnering up with TC pull or whatever it is. And they're doing the fucking outside. She has beautiful. I like that. People are adapting.


It's one of the things that you were saying, like you started this business and Bert started doing things outside and Thompson girl is doing like these pay-per-view shows, Tom Segura and Bert Kreischer doing these. And, and sometimes Christina, they switch up, back and forth. Right? They're doing these crazy live shows. I saw date the shit that he sends me. I mean, I'll show it to you to the show. The things that they can see during these live shows, it's a hundred percent uncensored because it's pay-per-view so they don't have to worry about YouTube. They don't have to worry about just whatever they are showing the most fucked up videos I have ever seen in my life, in my life, really in my life. Like he, he sent me three things yesterday.


That changed my idea of what's possible. Oh my God, you wouldn't do it. Yeah. Do one of his shows. Yeah. I would certainly do it if we were in town together and he's, you know, Tom's talking about moving here. If he moves here, everybody niggas moving out here. Well we know squad coming back here, we're gonna open up a club here. I'm down son, come on down. It's better here. You don't have to pay taxes for state. People are nicer. The bar set On the streets. They said they just streets. They said, Joe is stupid son. It's true. So I'm getting to fuck a body. He is, well, I saw the writing on the wall. I'm like, they're not going to open up the clubs. If you don't have a comedy club open, I can stay. If I'm, if, if the comedy store was opened, it would be no reason for me to leave LA no, but At the same, the same on the flip of that, just because it's not open.


It's not, there's no reason for you to be here. It could be that you could create it. Well, the only time I could create it though, isn't an absence of the club C because I wouldn't ask people, Hey, leave LA, the comedy store is hopping and killing. Come to come to Austin. But when you can't open, they can't, they're not allowing Them to open. And it could be years who the fuck knows. Now, here we are. Now eight months in Whenever we thought it was two weeks. But do you remember when you thought it was two weeks? So two weeks, but then again, even moving forward, Joe, we, you gotta remove the possibility of something taking. If you got to remove yourself from the possibility of somebody taking something away from you. And like, with me like that, like, like the way you're thinking and the way Dave has thought throughout the summers that I was like, yo, we really can make this shit.


Well, also what we were saying before that we were all connected to Hollywood because we thought we needed Hollywood, right? In order to get us on television or to pay our bills, we needed to get hired. And then once podcasting came along, I think people realized, no, you don't, you just need your friends and you have a bunch of funny friends and everybody's tight. And everybody tells people, Hey, go see, you know, Theo Vaughn's at this place, go see this guy, go see that guy. And we all get along together. We don't need anybody else. Yeah. But Joe, the toughest part, what did I noticed in this podcast world, which is predominantly white. That's the truth of it? You know what I'm saying? It's like, there's a lot more white cops podcasts when it comes to that. When you say like the friendship partner, making money, they really about that life.


They really do it. They really do it. They don't talk about it. Everyone in the guys did, I've done, you know, from the live, from Bobby, from the whole crew. It's never no all man. It's like, Yeah, everybody's friendly. And there's only a few people in the podcast world that don't have friends that weirdos, I don't know they're out there, out in the fringes. Right? Those poor people. They there, they, a lot of people go into things with like a legacy attitude. And the legacy attitude that, you know, from radio was to competing against the other people that are doing the same thing. Right. But the podcast world is not like that. But some people are like that. Like some people will complain if a guest is on this podcast and then on their podcast, they'll complain.


Like you were just on that podcast. Now it's going to take away from people listening. They got, got more shit to talk about. You ain't got no life without y'all. I never understood that Sunday. Like, Aw, I'm like nigga, every pocket I go on, it's talking about something else. Not only that, but if you go on a podcast and they like you, if you were on a podcast and they like you, and then I hear now you're going to go on Bobby's podcast. I'm going to watch you on that podcast too. Right. Because it's not like I'm going to, like, I do one podcast and now I'm out of time, but I'm not more time you're going to have another week is going to go by where you want something to listen to. And then more people are going to listen to you on Bobby's if they heard you on somebody. Else's.


And here's the thing, Joe, if you're interested enough for motherfuckers want to listen to you, that's it. If you could do it, the toughest part for this week, literally it's I think the anniversary of the first time I ever was on this show, really? I think it's this week Jamie's tracking. I heard those fingers. My producers don't do that. Be looking at me right in my face. I'll be trying to turn It is right. Yeah. I guess what was the, was that you were on before that, right? February 19th. Now you were on before that one, before that one? No, this one, we talked about the reserve shit.


That was a year ago. This week, November 12. So, but yeah, but you've been on longer. Yeah, but I'm just saying when the last one. Oh yes. Yeah. So I know you guys want to break down the story. It's not that sentimental, but I was just saying, I remember the dates. Yeah. And it's been like, it's been, I've been doing it for a year and it's been, it's been interesting. It happens, right. It gets picks up. Steam, picks up momentum. I see. On your Instagram stories, you're putting on your Instagram or that you're putting clips up to little assets and people are excited. Yeah. Yo, you like everything you said it was like, once I got out of the mode, like, I'm like, Oh, this has to be the greatest episode. I'm like, wait a minute.


And I'll start looking at the numbers of the most successful people in the podcast world. This is episode 1,584. Like, yeah, this is the 30 episode anniversary. Well, you know how Goggins tells her, but he used to be fat. I tell everybody, go to episode one. It's fucking terrible. It's terrible. We didn't even think it was a podcast. That's how we were doing it with just answering questions over Twitter and being stupid while we were high. No one thought it was ever going to be something that millions of people listened to. So when we started it out, it wasn't, you know, there was no expectations. Now people have expectations. You realize like how much money is in it.


You see all these people that get big deals. You see all these people that are on, you know, number one on iTunes and number two on fucking Spotify. And you go, fuck, because there's a lot going on. This is a whole network that you don't need a lot to get into The number one thing you have to do. And I kept tricking myself. We had talked about it was talking. Can you talk? That's ridiculous that you don't think that you could talk. It's one of the most funny things I've ever heard. I mean with no response, just like talking to myself, that's easy. You know what I'm saying? It's like, you know, I got a better chance of making a thousand people left in one person.


True. You know? Yeah. But it's been a, it's been a great ride, man. But dude teary over there, Julius, You know, who's the best at just talking bill Burr, that motherfucker just, he never has a dead moment. He will start on the subject and like, you know, and then you know what they want to fucking do. And then When I used to be an hour later, He's one of the guys that had it. I was like, what would your style be bore like, Oh, I just like, I don't want to fucking talk to nobody. I just want to say what I want to fucking say and fuck you. And then it was like the Monday rant or something Monday morning, Monday morning podcasts. And it was just like, damn. I was like, this motherfucker can talk shit for whatever.


It's like, whatever. It's like a dude that goes, he like wins all the bar, fight conversations. And it's the perfect platform for that. Oh, for bill. It's the perfect platform. One of the things he used to do is he used to use his cell phone. And this is when God, the early days of the Monday morning podcast. I don't know when it started. I bet you, it had to be around 2006, seven, eight, somewhere around there. It could be. I don't remember. But what I do remember is that he, he did a bunch of them where he like left voicemails. So he would call himself or call a service and leave a voicemail. So he'd be sitting there at the airport talking shit about some dudes haircut. Oh yeah. I remember those.


Yeah. Yeah. And then he had some where it was just, just him really ran just, yeah. The audio quality was fucking terrible. Cause he was literally talking into an old phone at the airport and then leaving a message somewhere. And that message became the podcast. You know what, and it was hilarious. It didn't even matter. The quality of the sound that I did was funny. Just like when I told you that time when Jamie was supposed to help me produce and then he fucking reneged on me. Right, right. He got real mad at me, whatever. I remember it was like, it was yesterday. Understand. I don't know how those two are connected, but, but bill Burr, when he, when he first started out, like that was literally the perfect platform for him in podcasting.


Like he's good at interviewing people. I've been on a show before other people have been on a show before he'll, he'll sit and talk to people. He's finding it. But as far as like ranting, he's the best. Yeah. They come from an angry place. Yeah. But he's also been doing it the longest. You got to think how many fucking years he's been doing that podcast where he just, that muscle is flexed. That muscle is tight. He doesn't need, like, you can form an opinion, but he doesn't need the response. Most people need to response and feedback. How, how else do you know if you're doing good or not? He doesn't think about that. He's like, and another Thing I was watching Seth Meyer the other night and it was, he was doing this monologue or whatever and it was going okay.


And then he, some people in the background would laughing and you could just see the posture and everything changed once he got a couple of people laughing, it was like, that's fine. Nice. Heard his Netflix specials. Good. Really? Yeah. I saw a clip on it and it did not look bad. It did not look bad. When did this is this recent? Cause I know he's had one. I want to say his Netflix special was at least a year ago because it was pre pandemic for sure. And I saw some clips and I was like, this is good delivery, good writing. And I'm not, I don't know that Seth Meyers like really had a long background in standup. Did he know he had a background doing that show, doing the monologue show, but I mostly don't think it was very good.


Whoa. I thought it was solid. Did ever see a Jamie it's October? Oh Jesus. That's not a good time to be confident. It was a very good inter what I saw the clips. I didn't watch the whole thing, but, But most of the guys were them to SNL. But you know, there's some people that have done talk shows and then try to do a stand-up special and they don't really have the chops for it. But that didn't seem like that with him. He seemed very relaxed. Wow. Well he probably, he probably, You did the right thing too. He probably hired a bunch of writers. I mean, I didn't see all of it. Maybe the part that I saw was the only funny thing.


I really have no idea Those guys, I guess when they like, when they, I guess to be buried into that show like that, you don't really have time to go out and work on him. Yeah, No, it's hard. But if you could do it like Jimmy Kimmel could do stand up for sure. A hundred percent Jimmy Kimmel, you stand up 100%. He could do it. What do you think about Jim Carrey on SNL as Biden? I didn't watch it. None of it. Nope. Not one piece of it. God damn. I got shit to do. If I'm going to watch something. I generally, when I get home, I like to watch like things that have nothing to do. What's going on right now. By the end of the day. I don't. Oh, you like documentaries, new Netflix special. Lets you skip the Trump jokes.


Oh there's a button. You can skip job jokes. Skip the intro on Netflix. You can see the chunk of stuff, but this is him talking to people. So he's interviewing people. This is just the interview about it. Oh, interview about it though. Okay. Oh, that's funny. Yeah. Well that's a good move because people are tired of Trump jokes. You know, it's one of those subjects, Man. I've been tired of him. And now I'm like the coming back around to be frustrated, to be frustrated when a dude is on his way out, you know, it doesn't make no sense. It's like he is still getting to you. You know? It's just a matter of time. If you want to say the people, the voice of the peoples was heard. It was a close situation, but it is what it is.


And he's gone. Why are you still mad? People have some legitimate gripes and I understand where they're coming from. But my perspective is it's not changing anything and it's not doing you any good to still be holding on your, if you were an anti-Trump Biden's seat. I mean, I don't think it's 99% official. Right? I mean, they just haven't said it yet. And they, when they say it, then he will be become president. And then Kamel Harris will be the new vice-president so concentrate on good voters. Now it's over. Right. But people are so obsessed. I heard the fuck-ups the other day. I might've said this earlier. Look at Mike Pence and I'm having a meeting with no mess, man.


Okay. Why you still keep getting mad? Cause this motherfucker don't have a mask on. It's gotta be something else to talk about son. They, they want to talk about negative things. That's the thing. Some people get addicted to talking about negative things and they can't regroup even after a victory. And now on positive things, they Want to continue to focus on negative things. And I can see their perspective too. Especially with all these crazy tweets. Like I won that election, you know, it's all fraud. It's all this. It's all that like, man, if you've got some real claims now I don't know what the claims are. I haven't really honestly investigated them. But if you've got some real claims, you got to present the evidence and then once you present the evidence, you say all the stuff like I got robbed, I really want it.


If you want to be in a position where you're respected, right? If you're the president of the United States, this isn't a regular guy. It's not like if you were involved in some ridiculous, like small neighborhood election and you were joking around on Twitter, I won that fucking election. That's that's that's to be expected. But when someone's in a position where they're in charge of the nuclear football club, it's literally are the commander chief of the greatest army. The world's ever known her motherfucker. You're saying shit like that. And firing people that don't agree with it. Yeah. Fireman, fire motherfuckers. Didn't like, I know these other places, like what? This would be a great time for a fucking terrorist attack right now.


Well, one of the guys he fired what the guy said was he didn't believe there was widespread voter fraud and he's like, you're fired. If you don't believe that you're fired. Like this is, this is like a madman. The interest Apart from me is like you try and to switch the thoughts of a person that is a huge Trump fan. It's a waste of time. It's only going to be the only thing you're going to be as frustrated. See, here's the thing though. I don't know. And this is where it's really important. I don't know exactly how the election went down in terms of like, was there like 0.01% fraud was, was there 0.5%?


How much fraud was there? We gotta assume that when there's people counting stuff, there's some fuckery going on. Yeah. But the fuckery that's been reported. It's bit light still no more than like 40. And then the only other problem is that it's all done through these machines. Right? And then there's been all these conspiracy theories about machines that were supposed to have been giving the votes to Trump, gave those boats to Biden. Now I could repeat those things, but I don't know if they're true, But what I do know is what I'm saying. I do it, but I know Georgia. I know the motherfuckers pulled all them envelopes up to the built-in and they cut them open and they took a man by the hand, they did them hand by hand yo, those, those ones that were recounts or whatever, those you can't, it's no machine that is hand by hand.


Right. It's fucking problem. And how does that work? Did they someone watch while they do it? Like, do they have a supervisor? Because I would imagine you would want to have like almost like two people watch while one person does it, which is so ridiculous. But it seems like you kind of, I know if you don't trust me, kind of have to have someone Watching it. That's part of the argument that Trump's administration was saying too, was that there were certain counts that they weren't allowed to observe. They had to be really far away and they couldn't actually see, Listen, that sounds like people that like soy beans, but that's the <inaudible> that's the verse soy boy attitude. But what if they're telling the truth? Here's the thing I don't know.


And you don't know either. So if they were telling the truth and people were counting votes incorrectly, They find no evidence of that. Every time that every time that they came out with all these losses and the jaw dropping them, dropping them. Cause there's no evidence of it. He's probably made he's. He's had to have made every argument he can make. No, listen, I agree with you. I agree with you. There's no evidence that they can present. That's going to show people right now that there was so much voter fraud, right? That they got to return everything and start all over or they got to give it to Trump. I agree with you. I think this is what all these experts are saying. They're all saying that even if there was voter fraud, it wasn't enough to tilt the election one way or another, but I don't know how these machines work.


So if I'm even commenting on it, if I'm saying they couldn't have done it, that's ridiculous. I'm saying they must have done it. That's just as ridiculous. I really don't know. That's like when you're talking about voting, you're talking about how many millions of people are voting and all this information is coming in and they've got to sort it out. You're going to have some mistakes. There's no way around it. But the question is, does it overall balance out or are there mistakes all for one side, if you find out the mistakes are all for Biden, then you're going to go, huh? Really well, who owns the company that makes the machines and then who, how are they financed and who programmed that?


And how are they programmed? Is it possible to fuck with the data? It is possible. Can you show me how to do it? You can do it. So everybody wants to know exactly what happened. I think I know a few people that know exactly what happened. I know, I know the machines and all that type of shit, but when they take the machines away and they say, okay, we're counting these. And by hand, the results of that have to be official. Yeah. Well they understand like the machines, but they was like, these melon motherfuckers was they, they had to fucking count every vote. Yeah. It's a matter of how they're recording it. Right. You would want to make sure that everybody recorded it accurately. I don't know how they do it.


But I would imagine that when I, when I was talking to a guy like Mike Baker and he was saying that even if there was fraud, there's not enough fraud to overturn it. I would imagine he knows some things. Yeah. I don't, I'm a moron. So me talking about, he w we all do that. You know, we talk about, he won. She won and there's no way there was fraud or it was definitely fraud. Or I think Trump won by a landslide. Like people get, they get real. So connected. They get real connected to who's who's winning or losing this election. And I get it, Man. I'm a Ms. Donald Trump, sir. Yo, I like not going anywhere, man. TV, bad, man. I've been missing him on TV. This is motherfucker's TV.


Persona is what sucks. What sucks that it's his TV persona is like, he's a TV motherfucker. It sucks that it's even possible that someone could monkey with an election to the point where you change the outcome. It sucks that that's even a thought that we could get into our head. That's what's one of the crazy things about people were so nuts that was leaving aside, like people that are good people will do some shady shit to have their candidate win. Yeah, for sure. That's politics. We're so crazy. That's politics. Anything goes, anything goes. So what, what bothers me?


And I do think that Biden won the election. And I do think that, I mean, I think there's probably some shenanigans, but I think the result is most likely correct, but it bothers me that there's even a question. It bothers me that anyone would ever think that anyone could fail. But I think that there's Republicans, the Democrats could do it. And I think there's Democrats that think Republicans can do it. And I think it's going to be real hard to 100% trust the election. That's one of the things that's kind of dangerous about someone going after it. This election is rigged the selections rig when Trump is doing that, he's encouraging P and you know, maybe that's a good thing if they are rigged, because maybe they're going to be able to figure out how to stop that from happening in the future.


Or maybe it's going to road, or maybe it's going to road. People's confidence in the elections. And the more he does it, the mortar roads and the market's dangerous. There's a real argument for that too. But listen again. I'm I don't know what the fuck I'm talking about, Man. It's just, I know it's nuts. It's nuts that you would, anybody would ever think there'd be any voter fraud on either side, but we know that people have done it. Like that's apparently how they got JFK in wasn't there like some crazy conspiracy about the mob rigged votes for JFK. And that's how he became. But wasn't that a thing, Jamie? Yeah. I've heard that never been proven. I've heard talks about recently. They were in such odds with each other that they would never have helped Him.


I think he was really at odds with them afterwards. Cause he didn't like the, the, the, the thought was that was one of the reasons why he was assassinated, that he kind of doubled back on his agreement. The explanation I heard, they were just helping local politicians, not to the president. We were drug runners. The Kennedys were moonshiners. They made their money selling bootleg liquor during, during the time where it was illegal. They were basically drug dealers. And then that became this gigantic political dynasty. They would have Trump's no, not the Trump family, but they motherfuckers, they were more Gangster than the Trump family because their, their Literal background was in drug running like bootleg liquor, like drugs, drug running.


You just don't think of it now because alcohol is legal deal. They were truck Runners. Yeah. And who had the shit To the mob and they were connected to the mob. Like you don't think they fucked with some numbers. You don't, you don't think there was some corruption who has the fucking money. I think there's an assumption too, that both sides are going to try to do it. I mean, that was why that was a, What did they do? It was also just selection, man. It's going to be interesting to see. Can, can, can Biden work with two parties, both parties. Okay. I hope so. I hope they, I hope they prove like the, the polarization of people that are opposed to Trump being in office. And now they're not Republicans and Democrats.


I hope they work together. Yeah, man. That's what I hope. That's what I hope. I hope they work together. Do it fast. Who can Biden is? Don't got like a lot of time. You got to get used to president CommonWell. That's what you got to get used to, Man. She's going to set up. I said it. I don't see how we can do eight years. So what if the economy is going strong? And I think 40 is going to keep it moving, man, who knows? Just the set up. I set it on stage and let's say, get ready for your first female black president, because this is the set up for her. She certainly could. When they groom it, she could, she certainly could take over too, if he dies or if he, if he can't medically continue anymore, but here's nothing you gotta think of.


They're doing shit to people that they're doing some wild shit in terms of medicine and regenerative medicine and STEM cells. And they just hook him up to STEM cells every day. Shoot them up with NAD and vitamin fees and steroids and growth hormone. You never know. They might keep that motherfucker around for a long time. How Joseph Kennedy made his fortune. Hint. It was bootlegging. This, this wasn't bootlegging. Oh, it wasn't. Oh, I can't see the end because of the white shirt. Okay. Yeah. According to the us biographer, that is a rumor that started in the sixties and seventies. And they're trying to figure out who killed JFK. And maybe it was the mafia because they were in that business. That sounds like the Kennedy family is trying to cover up their dirty tracks. It's a rumor.


The fuck outta here. Somebody has is a rumor about you bootlegging. Yeah. No, I'm, I'm just, I was looking, cause I've heard that too, but like Right away. Okay. Like in the stock market that, well maybe, maybe bootlegging too. Let's try another source. Let's see. Joseph Kennedy was a bootlegger type that in, Well, that story is going to come here. The daily beast, the myth of Joe's Joe Kennedy's house. So it is a myth. I don't know where I would find the correct story too, you know? Mm I know. Right? Like how do you know who's telling the truth and whether or not it's a big old historical coverup? Like if you were bootlegging, how much information would there be about you being a bootlegger unless you got arrested for it?


For me, I think cops were probably in, on bootlegging back then. Don't you think everybody that Could make money was involved with, for everybody? What Is my piece? You probably, they probably were angry that the bars were closed too. Yeah. And then they wanted a couple of bottles. Give me a couple of bottles, come out. Honestly, you can do whatever you want to do. Do you imagine if that's how we live right now? If booze was illegal, imagine as much as people drank. If you had a deal at all secret, you had to like have a big dude by the door yet have a password to get in. You're always worried about getting raided by the cops. Just so you can have a drink, but people would do it. They did it. They did it for years. They made organized crime. That's where like Al Capone made all of his money. Oh, that's yeah. That's the argument that's going on right now with, with the Mexican cartels.


Like the reason why they're able to make so much money is because all that stuff's illegal and they're consuming it in the United States. So you're playing a stupid game. You're pretending people aren't taking it when they are you making it illegal. Cause you said they shouldn't do It, but you want to control it. You're just Empowering, organized crime. And that's what they did with organized crime in Chicago. That's what they did. And with organized crime and a lot of areas, this country where they had, You probably want to position people that they had influence over to beat the politicians. For sure. They had so much money. And back then there was no internet. Nobody knew what was in your bank account or where it came across. Shut that dang off. Sorry, man.


To put it, put that shit on airplane mode. What are you doing? Do you know how to shut off the ding? Dino? Come on man. Up disrespect. But you've done it a few times. I don't understand why it keeps dinging thing again, man. Right? I'm sorry man. Oh, Don Don. Now you can't say shit now. You don't even know how to non dang your phone. Shut. Just shut the fucking ringer off. Flip it up. No, you gotta flip it up towards you. You you're keeping it down, which is off man. Okay. Dang man. It's kinda dang from beyond the grave. He is down here. She's adorable. And man, what we're just talking about.


I don't know. Do you remember Jamie? Oh, Kennedy's being a bootlegger. Oh yeah. I might be full of shit, but He didn't know for sure the story, but it was like, there was just a rumor. I don't know how, Right, for sure. There's a lot of organized crime money and fucking bootlegging. That's a fact I'm on antibiotics because I got shot. Yeah. You can't drink for how long? Like three more days. So refreshing Though. Give your body a little bit of a break. It is, but it is it. Nah, not missing it. You know what I'm saying? Like after a show, a little shot, right? Well, you know, I just got this for all the people that's been in the streets and got shot. We've got to get better.


Are you nervous for the country right now? Are you nervous about the future? No, not at all. No. I believe that we are always going to find solutions to stuff like the first thing, like you mentioned about people that need to work or the first thing That's going to happen is there's going to be some type of stimulus package, approved motherfuckers, gonna feel somewhat security or a little better if they have some money to be able to do something. But this is just something that this is just something that we're going to get past. It's just a, it's a matter of time. And with the vaccine being on board with them, having more ways to test somebody in a faster manner to don't cost as much.


I think it's going to change people's attitude the way they feel about certain things and things are start turning around. I hope you're right. My concern really is about how, how hard it's going to be. The turnaround, the economy with that many people out of work. That's what my, my worry is that so many people are going to be broke. And so many people are gonna lose their houses. So many people are gonna get evicted. I just don't know how they stop that and turn that around when all these jobs are gone, because all these businesses went under. That's what scares me. Right? It's like that this wasn't anticipated that I think there would have been another way to do it. You know, it certainly didn't lock down as much out here. Not nearly as much. And then that's a good point because I mean like whatever you worked for, whatever, just could be pulled from money.


You just like, That's the thing about like, you can't say that the people that are upset today are soy boys. They can't say that they're all pussies because there's a lot of people that are upset through no fault of their own. They lost everything, right? You could be the most disciplined guy in the world. You get up early every day, you work hard all day. You, you build a business and then all of a sudden COVID comes around and you find out your margins are a lot smaller than you thought. Well, nobody expected it to go eight, nine months. Right? So you're not making any money for eight, nine months. And you can't reopen. There's a lot of businesses like that. There's a lot of bars. There's a lot of, there's not enough Bailouts. There's so many businesses. There's not enough. And they're not going to give it to all. They're not going to give you all you lost. You're going to lose a tremendous amount no matter what.


Well, it was a lot of people to get that money. That was bullshit. Boy. It was so much goddamn fucking scandal with them. PBA loans, this shit, man, everybody was grabbing them. Bitches, you know, they'll find money. Then you got to pay it back. I hope we figure out a way to make this, make this economy bounce back. But I say, we, when I say we, I mean people way smarter than me. I hope I hope somebody figures it out. My son had the best life he can. Yeah. Well I hope so too. You know what I'm saying? Like, I think that it's going to get, you're going to just start. People are going to be concerned about people that close to them and their family and how that situation is going.


Yeah. I mean, everybody hopes that the next person that gets an office is going to nail it. Everybody hopes the next person that gets an offer is going to fix all our problems. We got to change the way we communicate with each other. That's a big, that's a big one. Everybody's locked in this trap of a us versus them of red vs. Blue of like what, whatever the, the trap, like whatever your particular trap is, there's men versus women traps. There's people get crazy with being tribal and being on a fucking team. We're supposed to be one. Team's supposed to be nice States of America. If we differ on small things like immigration or things like financial issues or how to use taxes.


And the most important thing is that we all want what's best for the country. Well, I want the country. We want to thank people. You want to that's the, that's how you want people to. That's what drove me the most crazy about Trump being presidents. I felt like it was the first time I can ever remember where people wanted things to be bad so that he would be a bad president. So that, I mean, I guess they probably did with Obama too. They wanted things to go bad so they could blame it on him. Like they would rather have something to blame on him then to have everything go well, like if you asked a hardcore Trump hater, would you rather, this would be a good question. Would you rather, the economy become the greatest economy the world has ever known and you'd be totally wrong.


And Trump, even though he he's a pussy grabber and he's full of shit and he brags about himself became literally the best person to make the decisions that were the best for the country. Or would you rather the economy fall to the toilet and Trump goes to jail, like Yeah. Yeah. There's no bar. Yeah. I know There would be no hesitation. Jay I'll fuck cam. Everything's fine. Everything's fine. Sounds like a relationship. Do whatever makes you happy? You like, fuck that. I don't want him to be happy. Definitely didn't want him to do well. Which is weird. Like they wanted him to get arrested. Then the economy to bounce back.


That's what it's about. But another thing they wanted to Joe, they wanted to feel like you cared about them. They wanted to feel like you cared about something or somebody else other than your fan base. That was a big part of it, man. People didn't, I don't think people were just looking for reasons to hate on him. And I know some people that like liked him. Some people love it. Some people love to no nonsense. Okay. People love the guy who came along and said, fuck you to politically correct shit too. There's a lot that people liked about him. People liked the idea that he got fucked over in this election too. They liked the idea that the deep state was involved and that people were rigging voting machines and miscounting votes.


And people love those stories. I do not know if those stories are true. I don't give a fuck about those stories. They're they're a bummer though. It's a bummer that there's those stories. This would be the ideal scenario. Whoever won one, if it's Biden and camo, they win. And then that's it that transfer of power, shake of hands. People do what they've always done with Obama. Do you don't want to do that fun? They don't want to do that. That's so corny. You don't want to shake him off again. You don't want to give up the secrets. You don't give up the keys. Scott, you don't want to give up the cars. I do it, especially if he wants to run again, see if Trump wants to do it again. He can run one more time in 20, 24. But the only way he's going to be able to do that, he's got to be able to sit down and shake Biden's hand and say, I'll see him for years, bitch.


It's gotta be you can't set that. You Can't just keep saying that the voting is a hundred percent rigged. And I won this election by a lot and all that's fucking dangerous because it's just dangerous for our confidence. It's dangerous. People talking about Rise up. You're going to, it's going to be something some Do. Don't say that. Here's the thing you got to show the evidence first. You gotta show the evidence first there's there has to be like, you have to compile all that evidence. If there really is that evidence, you got to compile it all in presented in a very solid way. Shut down. Yeah. It's it's not, I mean, it's above our pay grade DC. Even understand national politics on that scale.


But I think that as a country, I think you and I both know that this country is w this is like never been a position where you don't know what the hell is going to happen. You never know. Like you never know. There's, there's so much turmoil and weirdness and you never know what this isn't going to be another wave of this pandemic. Are they going to shut everything down again? Whatever it is, Whatever happened. Then we go, w w where, what has become our new norm? We go back to that. You know what I'm saying? Like things about to shift, right? A spring or summer thing is going to be in a totally different place in regard to how people feel about being in public. Again, they're going to have this, they're going to come up with some super rapid tests, a situation that's going to make the fucking essential workers.


People in medical field feel more comfortable. They're going to make other people feel comfortable. And eventually like, people are going to make decision. Am I going to fuck with this? Or what am I going to do? Live? I hope the vaccine. And you know that the election gets resolved quickly. Jamie, Jamie, if you had to guess if you had no, I know, but I mean, let them, let Trump say it's resolved. If you had to guess, what percentage of election fraud do you think there was? I guess it's not zero, right? Probably not zero, but it's like one, 2% like the normal polled Plus or minus 1%. That's a lot, but I mean, there's 150 million votes.


I don't think it's, I don't think it's one, but I think it's, I think there's a, some less than zero number or some more than zero number, rather. That is a voter fraud. I think that any reasonable person points. Yeah. It's not. And who knows which way it goes, because I bet there's voter fraud the other way too. We're not hearing about that because Biden won. But if Biden was like Trump and he lost that ranks, who knows, he might, they try to figure out a way that the Republicans cheated. I don't know, man. Yo, I'm going to tell you this shit. It's turned into comedy son. What's turned into comedy. This whole just not quitting. It's kind of crazy.


No, it's every day it's tweaked. No, it's not even crazy. It's entertaining. It's entertaining. I know it's unfortunate for me entertainment, but it's entertaining. I get that. It's entertaining, but it makes me nervous. It makes me nervous. When you start thinking that there's people out there that think that that there's been a coup, right. Or that Trump is attempting to coup there's like two different schools of thought. One school of thought is the deep state took over the election and they, they, they rigged it. And the other school of thought is this guy is trying to win, even though he lost. And he's trying to figure out a way to Sue his way back into the white house. And this is crazy. So there's yeah.


So there's a, that's a problem is that there's not a smooth transition One end, because he's got the power of the people. Like, again, those double him losing the support that he has. He knows that there's a community. He can, they're going to be fucking still on his Dick right now because he can shake some shit up. Fuck them. Fuck all of them. Am I ever going to get some help? Do you have any help today? I have it at my house. Yeah. You can't cook it though. Right? I can cook it once you figure out how much time we have between now and the show. Yo, you could bring some elk to the show. Not enough for everybody. No, just the sample. Yeah. Why don't you just come over my house. I'll cook for you.


What time do we have? I don't know. We'll figure it out. When we get out of here. Let's figure it out off the air though. But my two lesbian friends were supposed to meet me. So they're not like no, like no Manasseh, 12 lesbian. It's just like regular lesbians. They, my friends. Okay. That's cool then. Yeah. Who do they think? One Biden. Hell man. What? I said, my two lesbian friends adopted Mexican son, Eli. Who? I fucking love. He don't take his lesbians for Trump. I bet there's a whole Website. I, you know what I never thought about that. I don't think there's too many lesbians for Trump. I bet there's a few. I bet they get together and like yeah.


You know, like people, I don't think that that's never, I've never thought about this for Trump. Some people are really into anime. There's a t-shirt for lesbian. No, It's funny. But you would assume that if someone's a lesbian, that's what I was kind of getting at that you would instantly know who they're voting for. Right? I mean, I know that's kind of a profile, but I was definitely like short haircut, you know, short haircut, fucking man cut out suit with a bow tie, Right? Like how many girls with blue hair or pink hair voted for Trump? Is it less than zero? That's a good step. Yeah.


Trump pride. Gay Republicans on why they're backing the president. Okay. Because I get to dress up again And again, having a good time. It's cool outfit. It's a such a weird time, man. It's such a weird time, But I'm ready to just get on the river bro. I get it. I'm ready to just some nature. Do you think you're going to move there? Would you move there? I think so. That's a good place to be. I think the community, I mean, it just like just such a community man this summer and it was just so simple. Would you, would you get rid of your place in LA and just settle down there? Yeah, I can do that. I could do. I could do it Better for travel. Really? If you wanted to go left or right.


You're more yeah. Closest to the metal for everything, man. I just want to be around some trees. I think that's one good thing about people that can escape from LA. There's a lot of people that are escaping from New York as well. And they're moving to the suburbs and they're, they're liking it better. They're more relaxed. They're get some space. People are like, instead of being in the chaos. Yeah. I can drive to the chaos. You know, I was like, fuck it Or not even drive. Now, a lot of people are working from home. So you don't think it's going to change. I think there's going to be a lot of companies that realize like, Hey, I don't need this gigantic space to handle all these people. I can let people work from home. They're more productive because a lot of times people in offices, they get together, they talk, they have fun.


You know, there's a lot of rules. The grant, Oh man, I used to fucking be fucking break room. I never was doing work always in the break room. I seen dudes in cubicles doing this shit. Whether the cubicles here and their bolts on the outside, they're just having a conversation. And they're nowhere near their computer. People do that all the time. If no one's watching people do that all the time in some jobs, don't get it. Don't get personal Scooting back from the cubicle. That's hilarious. Jude's that are working all, all over the place. That would be more productive if they just had a certain amount of work to do and they could just get it done at home, You know? But sometimes they want to patrol. I think it was a good idea. Yeah. There's a lot of people that don't have jobs. You have to be there. Right? Auto mechanic.


A lot of people do fill in the blank. Carpenter. A lot of people have jobs, got to be there, but there's certain jobs like why, why do you, why do you need to sit through an hour and 15 minutes of traffic when you can just do it through zoom. I need to sit here in a pair of shorts and a t-shirt and get all your fucking work done. Like what, why do you, why do you need to go somewhere? You don't with computers today. You don't have to go. You don't have to go to it. They just want to control the movements of it. They just want to it's it makes sense. And I think it's going to go to that. Everybody's like I'm working from home. I work from home and they're getting a, getting the job done. Yeah. Everything is different. A lot of people are going to be able to stay home. And so I think that's just going to change the nature of cities. In general, less people are going to have to commute to them.


But that's one probably good thing about this is that people are gonna not have to commute as much. So maybe the roads won't be as jammed up. If that, that saves people so much fucking stress. If you're a dude who works in orange County and you live in LA and you got to make that drive every morning, you ever see that fucking drive I've come from that job. I've been going the other way of that driver. When you go orange County to LA at 7:00 AM, you want to just fucking end it. You just, you just like, I can't do this every day, But you can do it for a minute because that's the route to that. Cause I, my account is out in orange County and I did that trip a couple of times and I kind of enjoy being up in the morning with it.


Cause I don't have to do, I didn't do it. It was every day. If you had a job and you had to be at your job at eight 30 in the morning, every day and you live in orange County, you got to go to LA, you got to leave your house before seven. Yeah. Going to accept the fact that every morning there's a likelihood, a high likelihood. It's going to take you an hour and a half or you go on zoom and you can wake up instead of waking up at six, you'd wake up at eight. You wake up at eight, have a cup of coffee, sit down, turn on your fucking computer. I get up. I got, I got Maggie. I understand. I gotta get up early. I'm not like the old, the old Darnell has guns. Yo, I get it like shit down there.


Curled up. I'm just happy that there's alternatives for some people where they at least can work. If they can't be in an office, at least they can do some stuff on zoom. But for other people, man, that's what I was. That's what I'm worried about. What I'm worried about is everything man. Restarting. Like how does it Man? Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe, Joe. I know you worried about it. And you have concerns. Everybody worried about him concerns, but he visuals like this. Yo, what the fuck are you going to do? You gotta figure it out. People are going to have to figure it out. Yeah man. It's like, I understand you keep saying, yeah man, then I feel sorry for them. Sorry.


Eventually you're going to have to figure it the fuck out. Eventually nobody's going to be able to help you. Nobody's going to be able to vouch for you and you got to do it. Your fucking self. Dave, David Goggins said it, man. It goes back to that same point, man. They looking for answers. You are the answer. You got two excuses, a good one and a bad one at the end of the day. It's the same fucking excuse. I've said it before. And I know people say, well, it's easy for you to say, it's not easy for anybody to say whatever's going to happen. Moving forward. It's not easy for anybody to say, everybody's going to have the opinion of it.


Everybody going to be on the opinion of, well, give him a chance. Maybe he could bring the world back together. It's going to be a lot of Trump motherfuckers like yo, fuck you ass. So there's been no supporter. That's been angry than a Trump supporter. To the extent that there's sore winners and sore losers. You got to pick a sore. You can't just take both sores. The thing is they think they got robbed. That's why his treat tweets are. And even if you do Joe, even if you do have you feel, this Is the part that's fucked up is this mine. This is the part that's fucked up. Sitting There for a while. Probably not hot anymore. What was I saying, sir? This is the part that's fucked up about being sore winners and sore losers.


You got to pick a sore. You got to pick a sore and everything is not going to always go your way, but you don't have to be upset about it As though what he's saying to them is it was a robbery. So he thinks it's a robbery, man. It's definitely starting shit. You got it. That's it right there. Yo, why all your shit gotta be extra strong, man. Dirty fucking tea, pot, coffee, coffee, pot just keeps the coffee warm. After my time. Everything is like a workout. What's that? Does he want to come in? Who else did Dave's out there? They're going to come in his son. Yeah. Tell him to come on in. Come on. Do we have a camera for him?


Sweet. Taking this test results. Well, he gets tested every day. Doesn't he? Maggie just jumped up. Have you ever seen a baby dog? A little tiny little dog. I've never seen a tiny little dog. I used to have one. Wasn't quite that smart, but it was pretty small. I've seen little dogs. I just never seen one in the baby form Squad. What's up? What's happening?


<inaudible> Oh shit right here. Good morning. The whole circus. Isn't I don't know how many microphones we have. Unfortunately we have a, Joanie has felt really good. Marijuana is semi-legal here. How was this with semi criminal? Let me get so my guy is there. Is there any coffee? Yup. Yeah.


This is coughing. Jeff. Can you start tomorrow? Yeah. What's up man? What are you doing? Oh bro. Living the dream. Good to see you. How's the ostium and treat you great. We did two nights at stubs. Stubb's barbecue. The guy from the barbecue sauce. So he has a, like a stage. It's an outdoor event. Joe. You will love, They said you was there. No, they said you was somewhere else. I went to the Vulcan gas company. That's the only place I've been in town. The shell is doing that. Oh, that's great. That's the gift she's got coming up. Yeah. Cause capsid is gone. So people are doing shows anywhere they can. Are you gonna, are you going to buy a club here or you got to?


Yes. I'll be the first gig. All right. You heard it here for, I felt like I have to. It was Like as soon as cap city went under, I was like, Oh shit. Oh, now I have to. But I don't know what's going to happen after Biden gets into office, whether there's going to be another lockdown, like a national lockdown for awhile. So I'll wait until after that blows over. Yeah. I just keep moving forward. That's all. I, you know what I mean? Like everything that I've seen you do moving here to Austin and gets gangsters. Correct. Thanks man. We find a way. Yeah. We find a way we were just talking about that. People find a way I was saying like, what are people going to do? You know, with restarting the economy and you know, trying to get a job when all these businesses went under, like how does everything and Don, I was just saying, we do what we have to do.


We figure it out. That's true. I'm far from an economist. But I will say that the planning for your future is a good thing. It's a necessary thing. Even, even though it's uncertain, you have to remember the sun does rise every morning. Yeah. So just keep moving. Okay. And people that are in this shit right now, never thought that it was going to happen now that they know that this is a possibility. Now we have to plan for the future for the future. Yeah. I've never seen this before. Never. You know, you've never seen something as large as the American economy stop and then start back up. But it's a global phenomenon. It's like, it's, it's not like it's just happening to us. We're just handling it. I like how you handle it though.


I liked doing those shows that you didn't yell. Springs is a great idea. It was wonderful. We have in that chapel, that whole area outside, It was brilliant outdoors. I talked to my doctor, my family practitioner and he told me, you should play our doors. If you're playing doors, you UV air filters. You know like the specs of a building that might be safer. Many buildings now, today are not outfitted this way. And, and you know, you hope for the best he takes every necessary precaution, reasonable precaution, and it, but it's a pandemic. There's no guarantees. And many people giving you shit about doing shells. Yeah, No, no, no. I mean, and even if I did, you know what I mean?


Who cares? And that's it. There's nothing you can do about it. Nobody, no matter what you know, read about Jesus seemed to be a really good guy. They killed them. That's just the nature of people. Danielle, this dog is hilarious, Man. This dog is age of this dog. Makes everybody feel good. She's so cute. I've never seen a little dog as a baby. I've only seen them as full grown little bit. I don't like this. This is going to be her size right here. That's how she's going to stay. Yeah.


She goes through it like this with a little bit more barking more Now, how was it traveling with it? Is it you like it more or the company? I mean, what is it? It's dope. Like I'm like, when I got her, I was like this, Oh, she's an emotional dog. Right. But now that I got it, I'm like this. Yeah, I'm an human. Oh. And like, yo, let me tell you something. So sometimes I'll be up at five 30. It's she'll be up. Her ears will be up looking like, what are we doing nigga? And I'm like, at least somebody has to be right. Increases the amount of love you have. Right? Cause you have this dog. And she follows me everywhere while I was at the show. The other night I was on stage. And they said she was shaking barking when she heard my voice is crazy.


She was flushing. Yeah. It's a different world, man. You got a little dog that counts on you like that. Those are different kinds of dogs too. They're so little. They have to be held. He had to carry him most of the day. She's scared of cold. Like why is she? She might be a little combination of both. She, she, maybe she needs a drink. She has to pass. She's five months old. How is she keeping it together? Don't talk about it like that. She probably just need a little warm. Do you have, do you have dogs? How many? One dog. He probably have a huge Wolf. Kind of don't have a golden retriever. Oh the sweetest dog in the world.


He's the nicest dog ever. Perfect. He's so nice. That dog looks like he has a great life. He's just a love sponge. Like that dog is just all about love. It's all he wants to do is like kiss you and let you pet him. And who spends the most time with your dog? Me probably. I can see, I spent a lot of time with him. We have a morning ritual. What's the ritual. I just get up in the morning. As soon as I see them Goodman Morning, sir. Good morning, sir. He starts freaking out. Whew. Whew. Away Tail for a while. Yeah, he does that, but he loves chasing balls more than anything. He's a great guy, Tracy. Thank you, sir. No, he's a sweet dog. You got a dog, a F three of them.


What kind? Australian shepherd. And one kind of like this where they call it a Joannie. I think they call it it's half Chihuahua, half one of those hot dogs. That's the one Baba. The one of my special bye-bye that's him, But have this And half a dog. And then my, my daughter has a little, a little dog. Like not a, not a Chihuahua. Can't remember what kind of dog she is. My daughter has a Chihuahua mix. It's like a Chihuahua with like, I think he's got some whip or something in him. So it was a Chihuahua with long legs. He's adorable. You know, I was wanted, I wanted my kids to train animals when they were little really that's one of these things I should have followed through on.


But the reason I did it is because I wanted to learn how to be patient with other people. And I figured if they train the dog or something, it takes patience. This dog is adorable, but is I know nothing yet. She don't know shit. The real problem is when you get dogs that need a lot of training. Like if you want to have a German shepherd or a working dog, we've got a Belgian Malinois. A lot of people get those dogs. You don't realize like you, you, you basically got like a little genius with teeth that lives with you. That to figure, figure Out problems. It was like, have you heard of those celebrity? Like the German shepherds, the guard dogs, the real ones, but that no 200 commands shirts and training.


Yeah. That's yeah. I've seen guys do that shit. One of those dogs spend like 200 grand on it and it died in like a week. Those are crazy. If you could have a dog like that, that's a commitment man. Like those dogs need work. That's fine. Germany's shit. Those dogs are so smart. They're from a long history of working dogs. Those are task oriented dogs. There's a long history of Isn't she adorable? Come on man. She is. She doesn't want to be held back. Have you ever taken a dog hunting?


No, you can't do that. Right? It's too dangerous for it though. You wouldn't want them to be in the woods. First of all. Cause you probably scare off the animals. But second of all, he is like the instincts, chase, squirrels and shit. He chased a squirrel, but he's like a, he's a lover. He's not he's there's no aggression in him like with other dogs, like he's always the beta. He's always he's he tries to be the alpha, but they, they bark at him. He's like, sorry, sorry. The, the Australian shepherds like that she's well, she's like, she's like the dog you described it needs work, but you can tell she's a herder. She corrals kids. She corrals me and the not interesting. Yeah. They have it in their DNA.


They were seen that They really do. It's a and the dog is really smart. I didn't ever train this dog, but you would think I had, I just talked through it and you could see her face trying to figure out what I'm talking about is really cool. I think he's doing something with the dog Out there. Went out to beat his dog. We'll figure out words. Like it's not just commands. Like my dog knows you hungry, man. Do you want to eat? Like he knows. He knows what I say. You hungry. What do you want to do, dude? You want to throw the ball? He's like, let's up with the fucking ball. We'll go over by where the ball is. You got to go outside and he'll just start walking towards the door. Like he knows a few phrases. Cause I, I definitely trained him, like sit and all that shit.


But sometimes they're just smarter than other dogs. He's a really smart dog. Yeah, man. Does he like Austin? Do you like, I love it. I love it here. What do you, what do you do? Have you like, Oh, Danelle down with the count. That's actually you did a great job. You actually put it back. Perfect. That's perfect. I Was dead in frame. Don't Worry about it, man. Damn. That's the best recovery I've ever seen from one of these stupid things. These aren't ideal. These cameras mounted on the wall. I like the setup a lot, man. Thanks. It feels homey. He actually just tricked me into doing the podcast. Sorry. Okay. Now I'm going to, I'm going to come and do it like for real real, for real.


For real. Yeah. As a matter of fact, I should come after the inauguration. Okay. Let's do it. I'll come after the inauguration. Nobody believe I got shot son, Dave, I don't know what's going on man, but everywhere I go, don't eat there. Why I can't eat over here And you're going to crunch on the air. Well, you're crunching in the microphone. You're eating. Come on man. I said he was going to bring up yo son. And he said that he was going to bring enough help for me. I would totally do that. Is it good? Yes. Have you ended up telling him about it? So What do you do? You make jerky? You barbecue it. I just put it on a grill. I usually put it on a, you know what a Traeger grill is.


It's a pellet grill. So it just has like little wood pellets they make with sawdust, press the sawdust and these pellets support into the machine. So it's basically just fire and wood. So it's like, keep it at a low temperature. Control it like two 65 till it hits 120 degrees internal temperature. Then I pull it and then I see. Or the outside one or two ways either I do it in a cast iron frying pan with beef tallow, which is rendered beef fat. Oh wow. Or I do it. I have a grill. I could do it outside on the, another kind of grill. Usually I like to do it in the cast. Iron frying pan. You heard it First Joe Rogan. Doesn't just like killing animals. He likes Yo. He always has a perfect, he got this perfect little chopping block.


He put him on, he always throw the jalapenos on his side. Right. And it's just, you see this perfectly seared meat. And then the knife is like a Japanese, some extra shit, little blood. It did a little jalapenos and he's showing off, sir, you cook it all day. You're not, not anything like you guys, Darnell can't cook. I couldn't believe it. He challenged me. I thought he was joking. He was like, I'm a cook for all these people. I literally thought he was joking. I said he can't cook. He's like what? He like he was offended. So he makes me take him to a grocery store. This is in Ohio and I was laughing the whole time until he started shopping.


He goes to the lady, do you have clam juice? I said, choose. So it has all these fucking ingredients killed it. Cook for like 20 of my friends in Ohio and then went and did a show. It was amazing. And then Made him apologize to me. He was like, you did a good job. I was like, no motherfucker, you got to do it on stage. You said you was gonna promise with face. Fuck that shit. Saying it on the podcast. It was amazing. I made him say it. I was like, he was like, yeah, Donna. I was like, nah, nigga, what the fuck did you say? How did you learn to cook? Just Watching my mother cook, just watching cooking shows. But I do remember when I was younger, my mother was a part of publisher's clearinghouse. And I think they had like one promotion where you get a Betty Crocker's recipe book.


And they had all these recipe cards and it just sent it to, you know, it's like, like meats. And then you see all these recipes. And I used to look at the recipe. I was like, man, we ain't got shit to make none of this with we had the recipe, we didn't have the ingredients. So I just started reading those recipe cards. When I got older, I was like, I should start with, just fuck with this shit. I couldn't cook. And then I just started fucking around and just started having You go off recipes now. Or do you have any in your head? I go off of it 100%. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? It's like, you know what? Cooking? It's like a technique to an art of cooking, like art, a cook. If you know how to cook, you can cook. Whatever. It just all depends on what spices or whatever.


But if you're not a cook, you're not a cook. What's the specialty. I don't really have a specialty. Really. I don't have a specialty. I'll follow a recipe. Somebody would do something. I get inspired by something. But I do know I make these garlic noodles, right? It's not a specialty, but it's so Whopper. It's like a wet ass pussy. Just, it's a wet ass pussy, dish side. It's no way around it. They love the garlic doodles and I make a dope ass girl. You can put whatever protein you want on it. But the garlic noodles are fucking crazy. In fact, you made those at night. Yeah, he did. That was, I was impressed. I had, I put, I love this thing. He said the metaphor we had the recipes, just not the ingredients.


That's a good metaphor for like a lot of things in life. We have the recipes, but none of the ingredients, We didn't have it. Well as a bar should write that down. Yeah. Out will I remember it, but this is the truth. Someone will tell you. It's true. It's watch podcast tomorrow. Yeah. Everyone wants equal access to the Ingredient. That's right. I had the recipe really quality. Right. But none of the ingredients That really is the difference. That's a great way to, that's a great metaphor. Yeah, it is. Yeah. For life. That's what I was telling.


Y'all niggas, man, yo, he been not listening to my story. The whole show days. Anytime I mentioned I got shot. Believed him the first time. I believe them. The second time I believed them every time, You know Peter Edwards. Yes. Great comedian. I saw a video today. It was on some guy's Instagram. He's a comedian. It was me introducing him at a comedy club when I was like 17. Wow. Let me just send it to me out of the blue. Yesterday from DC. Which one? Oh yeah. Pierre from DC. Yeah. He used to do the funniest joke about getting shot. I'm not going to do another guy's joke, but he, you know, he got shot in DC like one night he, Oh yeah.


I remember that funny. She's funny dude. Shot. Nobody fucking believed me, man. We believe you. Yo. Are you going to bring some elk? I told you I'll cook something. I'm ready. I'm ready, man. I want to see what, what they say in the streets. What's this fuss is about. I want some elk son. Yo, everywhere I go, motherfucker. Say, did you try the elk? That's all I know. Is it gamey? It's not like, there's a weird taste that people associate with like venison, a gamey taste. And for the most part, it's either hasn't been prepared correctly or it wasn't taken care of correctly after the animal died.


Like that's for the most part, what? The game, it's a different flavor. But I think what people associate with, with not tasting good like that. I think a lot of that, a lot of it, not all of it, but a lot of it. Isn't just personal taste. It's bad preparation. You get a steak from a grocery store. You're assuming that professional butchers like people that grow the cows professional, butchers all down the line, they get the steak. If you got a guy's deer meat, who knows how this guy took care of that fucking deer, You don't have no marbleization nowhere. No, marbleization no marbleization in there. Nowhere. Sometimes people, you know, sometimes people shoot them and <inaudible> talking about date.


No, wait a minute. That's a show. Exactly. Dave, this is go-to picture. Not going to shame me. You're not going to shame yo. This is a good elk day right here. So it is a good dog. Wait, what does the captain say? Watch? He mentioned something about a jalapeno somewhere. She's the final product. Oh shit. That's pretty right. But what's that a dry rub? What rubber is that? That's a Saskatchewan black and Saskatchewan. It's a trigger rub. It's like a, like a Cajun style almost. But it's got, it's always black, but not like it's a kid Assault to kill malicious. It's the perfect rub. I love that. Rub for elk. So what you eat when you cook it? You like, you cut it up yourself.


You know how to cut steaks. That part is easy because that part is a, what's called the back strap. That's the big fit piece of meat. That's on each side of the spine. The knife though. Is that a Japanese? No, that's an American knife. Who made that knife? Was it? Does it say in the caption? No, it doesn't. There's no tag or nothing. No, the dude who made it was shit. You wouldn't even find that you wouldn't eat in there somewhere. Same knife. Real close to killing elk. How long are you eating that? Elk. You can eat it for a whole year. Literally a year. Yes. I got it. There it is the guy that gave me the knife. There's C Neanderthal.


Oh, chimney knives. C H U M N E Y to adults. It's a dope knife. Yeah. You need it for all year to hundreds of pounds of meat. It's like 400 pounds. Huge. Huge. So Casey you're shooting elk. You're bow hunting. I'm imagine. Yeah. What happened? That runs off. You got to follow it for like a day or two. If you hit them. Right. They die pretty quick. Oh, okay. Yeah. He'd do it with a Boto son. Yeah. But you have to practice a lot, man. This can do with a bowl. It's not easy. But the point is I know exactly where that meat is coming from. Like that. I know the whole chain of command.


I know everything that's happened from the time that animal got hit until the time I'm cooking it. That's interesting. You know? Cause yeah. It's mind blowing. I get all my mates from strangers. Yeah. Most people do. Yeah. You don't think about it. I was in Alaska once and the lady told me that she hadn't eaten something. She didn't kill herself in years. Wow. And this woman looked like a Betty Crocker model, like a house model. She was working in an ammunition store. You know, I had never been to a gun store before. It was ridiculous. This isn't fair banks, Alaska. It was so many like think of a kind of gun. The guy goes, this is a sniper rifle.


It can, you can shoot a bear with this from two miles away. Couldn't imagine why I would shoot a bear. That was loud. I couldn't, I was the weirdest sales pitch. And he literally said that to me. Yeah. That's like a thousand yards, right? Isn't that? Isn't two miles, Two miles away with how many Thousand miles is a, a mile or thousands of 5,000 feet is a mile. Right? It's not yards. Yeah. It's great. So they Can shoot things. They can shoot things at a thousand yards like snipers have hit shot 10,000 yards. So just think of that number. Yeah. It was a crazy thing to just be able to sell to somebody.


You know, I'm not going to get into all that gun stuff, but A mile is 5,000 feet and then a thousand yards of bullet. That's crazy. That's so far. It's really far. That's a long, that's a long squint. Yeah. They could 10,000 feet for them. It's nothing. That's nothing scope though. There has to be a scope, but Well, again, this was Alaska. So you got to think things like guns, there are more utilitarian and like, you know, New York or something people do need, you don't want it to be out there. I think. Yeah. Everyone has guns up there. Well they're also have bears and fucking moose and shit. Yeah. It's crazy. It looks, it looks unfinished.


It's beautiful. It's a wild place. It's one of the last real, the people that live up there are different kinds of human. They're more they have. They're just, they're they're more durable. <inaudible> bean eaters. They have all these Alaska isms. It, they call, they call, they call leaving Alaska going outside. Really? Yeah. They say it's like a cold. They say the lower 48. We all heard that before. Right. They'll call they'll call the rest of the continental, us little 48 tons of them. But it was, it was fun up there, man. I had a good time. I've only done shows up there. Once I did shows an Anchorage with Ari, we had a good fucking time.


They were good people, but they're sturdy. They're like you could tell they can, they survive winter deal with shit that people don't have to deal with. Male to female ratio, male to female ratio guys out number women in Alaska. I think 10 to one, 10 to one. It's not many women. Awesome. Motherfuckers are sexy as shit out There. Bitch. 10 to one. Well, yeah. That's what he would think. You think, Oh, if you're a woman, Oh this great thing, guys, you got 10 dusty during the fingernail choices, these guys are rugged. Right? Right. Yeah. The rugged, you know what I mean? Yeah. Let's stick to the jobs. I was the only dude in the nail shop and fair banks are like everybody else's nails, hands look like shit.


I've been mining all day. I met a guy as a gold miner, weird jobs like that. That's how it was. And the air force, when I was stationed in Koontz on Korea, it was like 10 guys to every girl and whoever she was, she was America's next top model. She had the attitude. Like she was like, every one of them checks was like, motherfucker, you gotta compete. That's why niggas was going downtown. It's definitely an unhealthy, I didn't know Danielle, you know, Danielle speaks Korean like compensate fluently, but just calves casual. But no, I didn't know that we were in New York when we were shooting Chappelle show, we walk into a deli.


Yeah. And you know, two Korean guys talking to each other, Darnell turns out, you know how he talks and he starts coming back. But that's the only thing. And I thought he was fucking with him. I'm like, come on, man. Don't do that. Like, I'm so sorry sir. And the guy, because the guy looks shocked and then the guy started talking them back and they talked to each other for a couple of seconds. And I'm like, I was floored staring at, I couldn't believe it. He goes, Oh, they thought he said, they thought we was stealing son. And I told them that we wasn't stealing. Like they call it the dog getting motherfucking in his own language. And he was, he loves it. He said, you promised me to call him a doggy motherfucker. <inaudible> yeah.


I went hard. So I don't muck it up. Well, he was saying something about you while you were standing there and he didn't know that you could speak Korean. Me and the guy was engaged the conversation. Dave thought I was mocking him. You know, Dave, that I was mangled, but I was really having a conversation with him. So Dave didn't know, he thought I was like, fucking with him. Like, yo, you can't talk like that. And then I was rocking with him. I was like, Oh shit, Those guys were floored. I was floored. Like when they see a black guy going to one of those stores to speak any level of Korean, they fucking lose it. Like how often does that happen? Clearly, this means one can surmise that when you were in the air force, you spent a lot of time off base. I did. You would just be in town and just hanging out.


We go, when we had days off, I would go to like these little small cities or whatever. They live just, they never experienced Americans, let alone a black guy and I catch boats and shit over there. Just hang out with him. And that's how I got, they got customed to me and I got accustomed to them. Can you read it now? I couldn't read it, but I could back in the day I could spell my name, but it was just like, I was with trustworthy people. You know, we all work together and it was just like, fucking I do, man. Let's go see what your culture is about. You know? That's cool that you learned that that's a rare thing. That's probably a difficult language to pick up to. The sounds are so different. Well, to me, I think it's a Testament that you're a people person, which goes back to the original point.


We all made. You'll find a way if you want to hang out and talk to people and nobody speaks your language. I don't speak that language. Yeah. You find a way. Yeah, you Will. Did you learn from books? Did you take, It was just share with the main gate we worked at main gate. You would have 12 hours, 16 hour days. So you it's a one American on one side and there's two Koreans. On the other side, you can just stare at each other all day or you could just start doing word association. You know what I mean? This point that stuff comes up. <inaudible> was it? What did you just say? Yo airman, a main gate. Airman Rawlins, man helped you. That was the greeting. I would say when it comes up, that's what they would say comes up and they'll tell them, but I would switch it to me, comes up and I'll tell them <inaudible> they'd be like, Oh, and it was <inaudible>.


They used to get him when I get a Dre. Right. They'd be like, Aw, Lawley's white, white, white. They was like, donuts. Don't answer the phone because I sound like them. And then they would say something else. I didn't know. I was like, yeah. Yeah. It comes up. And I told him the envelope, touch them up. They'd be like, Oh, okay. Yeah, your accent was perfect. Yeah. I would do the same. Like when I start learning Spanish, I went to Ecuador once for like six weeks and just started picking up Spanish. I had a driver that I just met the guy who hired him. So he would drive the car. He spoke like a little bit of English and I spoke less Spanish, but we did the same thing by the end of it. By the end of the six weeks, my man, I could speak Spanish. Yeah. But I wasn't a mimic.


I would mimic the action of whoever taught me the word. If I learned the word from an Argentinian, I'd say like an Argentinian says it. If I That's why? When I, when I do Korean or whatever, when I do it, even when I do it in my act, when it's broken Korean people know that's the oddest shit. He got the tone of an older person to respect the person. It's the oddest sheep. Oh yeah. No. Like a grill. Kerryn could tell who I was around there giving my, my, my, my accent. So I have a friend named Japanese, Nike. I know Japanese knocking. Yeah. She, she is from Tokyo. And, and for some reason when she was in high school and moved to Alabama, she learned English from Alabama people.


Whoa. And which created the more hilarious accents I've ever heard. Hell yeah. She got a kid. I just wish she got a country. She got a country accent. Wow. She's yeah. She's the best. She likes lemon pepper, chicken wings. That kind of stuff. Yeah. There's all these weird tones that change the meaning of words in Korean, in particular. Right? In Korea in particular. Because you can tell the way people use their voice. When you talk to people, older people always talk down to people. It don't matter what you did. It didn't matter what it is for you to celebrate. It's always like, ah, it wasn't enough. Do you know that those problems in communication is why Korean air only teaches pilots in English.


They only learn and communicate in English. They're not allowed to meet again. Well, because they started, they, they recognized that there was an issue with the superior and dealing with a superior. Like if you were my captain and I was yours, I couldn't say certain things to you. If the fucking planes gonna crash. Oh, I can't simply say you you're doing it the wrong way. This is, you can't say it, but in English, you can't. So they taught them to communicate in English because it's, it changes the way. Or they only use English because it changes the way you communicate with people. You don't have like the cultural classification of the superior of a, you know, an older person who demands, respect. I get it. And that's the one thing people don't understand about.


Especially Korean culture is a level of respect that they have. That's that people think it's like, Oh, you don't fuck with me because I'm black. No. To level of respect, they have, they give a fuck about being older. Like that's money. That's prestige. That's everything you being older in Korean culture was money. I was around Korean. I like this. I like this cultural nuance. I feel like it's a fascinating culture. Don't have hard workers, but they don't have it's like, like Korean dads don't really have connection with their kids like that. They don't have like the ultimate emotional. Oh, you did a good job. Shit. They're very bad at their job And their kids.


That's it. In general, I had a good friend of mine who was a, a doctor. He was going through his residency while he was on the national TaeKwonDo team. And the dude would literally be in school and he would take breaks to put his backpack on. He's filled the backpack up with, with books and run up staircases and go all the way back down, and then go back to go into the library to finish his work. Oh wow. And then he would find a way to go to the gym every day. And he won the national championship and there's this Korean kid I've never met a person who worked harder in my life to this day. I think about that, dude. He was always tired. I go, how you doing man? He goes, I'm always tired. I'm always told that motherfucker every day would be in that gym every day.


Junk sick Chang. That was his name. Is he still alive? I don't know. I haven't talked To him in a long time. Junk sick Chang. He's a guy that was like, he was probably like the star student of our team during my, when I was competing because he was this guy that was not just a national champion, but also a guy who did it while he was in his fucking medical residency. Like the amount of work that he was capable of doing was, and He was like, the way Koreans are in, you know, the way he would describe it to me, he's like nothing's ever enough. No matter what I do, it's never perfect. Like I D I D no one, no, one's here to praise me. I got to keep working hard. It sounds like a fun guy In the military.


It was like, when you were like, what somebody was out wrench or whatever, they used to do this thing called education, where they could just talk to a little Korean motherfucker, any kind of way they want. And they used to have this little greeting they used to do. And then you just see the, the other, the young Korean, just like, <inaudible> like, they could do whatever they want into this motherfucker. He could not do nothing, but just show them respect. They used to like, it, wasn't no rules. Like if you do this, they would fucking beat them motherfuckers up or whatever. They came back. But there's one thing I liked that you described the reverends for older people. Yeah. I feel like here in America, we just discard people really quick. Yeah.


It's not wise. We should get more than half price at the movies. If it's a certain point. Yeah. Come on. That's the least they could do. Wow. We've, we've forgotten that it's important to have people that are older than you. That figure life out a little bit better than you have to help lead the way When y'all guys were running for president, the way they kept going in on Joe Biden for being old and, you know, chill, you know, whatever, whatever. So come on, man. That's what I mean. I Like what Trump calls the elderly, the elderly as if that somehow doesn't apply to him, Joe. That's how I help you all day. I did a show once. Right. And I was so caught up in myself. I was like, look at all these old head motherfuckers that I went to high school with.


Right. I was like, Oh, that's the motherfuckers that I'm their same age. I forgot. That's real. That's real. Every once in a while. Older than me. And then Yeah. They're the exact same age I'm talking shit. Yeah. Oh man. All my friends around my age. You don't feel it. Yeah. The more like they give, like, you know what I mean? They dress the part. That's why it's very important For older people to actually have their shit together. Because when older people actually have their shit together, maybe people will resume the idea of respecting older people. Like maybe, maybe it'll become more of a trend in the future. But when it should have people that old is still crazy.


When that's problem with a guy like Trump, that old instill, I won this and big, like all the craziness, like the girl used to bank called her horse face on Twitter. Like that kind of craziness. Yeah. That kind of craziness. It's like, But he come to expect it of him doing, it became very entertaining, man. He made it all entertainment, but didn't, wasn't sharpen people's lives, But it's like close. Like, you know how you'll see old person dressed up and you know that maybe like 30 years ago, that outfit was the shit. You know what I mean? Yeah. But, but, but maybe he's not killing it. And it's, it's like, you just, you could see him put it on one time and just be like, this is it gone without me fashion, fashion.


Isn't it funny how fashion eventually comes back around and then you got dudes dressing up. Like they're old timey photographers. When I grew up this summer for me, I just grew up with it. I don't even give a fuck. You know what I'm saying? I'm like, I remember this summer son, I was starting to buy shit that had waterproof on it. You know what I mean? Reversible. I wasn't. I was like, fuck that fucking city bullshit. I was buying shit that was fitting for the condition and the weather that I was Right. Close. Become utilitarian. Yeah. I was like, get out of a city. You got where's the work clothes for right. Everything's practical, Alaska.


Alaskans. Understand that shit, Boy, do they, they get it. That'd be hard place to go. Like if I had to go buy some clothes for a date in Alaska boy, that's a tough one. Yeah. Yeah. You got nothing. I hope you like waiters bitch. You got a few days a year where it's cold, where it's not cold outside. And the, and those days it's like 24 hours. But those people are conditioned for it now. But that's where it's weird when it's 24 hours. Sorry. They, they had all these signs up. Cause this was like in November, all these, it was like game of Thrones. Winter is coming and that there were these signs and said, get your happy lights. Have you heard of this? No. Feel like a UV lights with people putting their house that mimics sunshine just so that they don't get depressed.


They're home grown, man. It's like all, all that's crazy. Do you remember that? There was a vampire movie a few years back called 30 days of night. It's all about vampires that show up in Alaska because there's 30 days where it never gets light out. Oh, that's a good premise. So these vampires just Fook this town up for 30 days because they know when. So they, they bring this vampire familiar that pulls the boat into the Anchorage shore or whatever the fuck they landed. And they get out in this small town and just wreck havoc on this town for 30 days, Robin Williams and opportunity did a movie. The opposite of that. It's called insomnia. You ever seen that? I tend to see that. I don't think it was a weird character thing, but Chino's character is a cop.


It's a real. And, and, and, and Rob, Robin Williams is a guy he's looking for, for a heinous crime. Right. But the backdrop of the movie was that it was daylight for 24 hours a day. And the guy had terrible insomnia. Oh, that's a rough way to live when it's never gets dark out. I remember doing it when I was in Anchorage. I was with did shows up there with orange fear and we went fishing and it was like two o'clock in the morning. And it was bright outside. I was like, this is weird, man. I would love that. It's weird. I would love it to fishing at two o'clock.


Yeah. You can choose to keep going. There's parts where it gets dark. Like barely fly down, fly. No, we we're trolling for salmon. How do you troll for salmon? You pull a boat and you got like a boat and you cast some lures in and you really try and get the salmon aggravated. That's what they wanted. They did not really hungry at that point. They're trying to fuck. So when they get your lure, they're really pissed off at it. More than anything. Jesus Christ. People who thought of everything, who the fuck would think to ag aggravate a fish aggravate salmon. Yeah. Somebody that needed that Salmon that only eat plankton. They don't eat. They might microscopic shit. Like they don't really eat fish. This is in a river. You're done with it. Yeah. You pull the lures by, I think that's is that Chinuch or Sockeye or I'm trying to figure out which one doesn't really eat fish.


And the only time you catch him is when you piss him off. I don't know nothing about my salmon's like Sockeye. I don't know my sandwiches at different personalities or anything. So Some, some fish just eat fish. Right. And some fish just eat microscopic shit. And there's one particular type of salmon that only eats microscopic shit. And the way you catch it is by getting pissed. And that's in Alaska. They do that out of like Bristol Bay. I think that's Chinuch is that correct? And salmon migrate, right? Yeah. They migrate. Yeah. So they, they saw water or they freshwater houses, their boat. That's what I thought. Yeah. They're they, they move through, I forgot what it's called, but they, they go out to salt water and they come back to spawn and freshwater and they have to do it in the same river.


So if you dam the river up, they're fucked and they die. They don't know where to go. And they, they never wind up reproducing Money. Like which one is the moment Is huge. Well, all fish it's like probably tuna. Really? Yeah. But there's, you know, they're running out of tune, man. They keep just Jack and tuna talk to those old tuna guys in Japan. And they're like, we used to see a lot of tuna. Now you go to the tuna market. It's a fraction of what it used to be. This is not as much tuna left. Yeah. People love sushi. I normally do in Atlanta. That's what, a lot of what happened. He's referring to, I know they love of sushi and Alaina brought in a big thing about sushi in Atlanta.


What happened before? Quick question, before I go, this is what, cause this is coming up in the next time we meet, I want to ask you about what you think the vaccine are. You taking it, Take it. If it works. If I feel that the doctors have all gotten their opinions behind it and they think, you know what it is is like an MRN, a vaccine, this new vaccine, it makes your body think that it doesn't introduce actual COVID into your system and you fight it off. It makes your body think that it's COVID and your body builds the proper proteins to fight it off. A guy explained it to us yesterday. Nicholas Christakis he's from Yale, Your soybean boy.


He's a good man. He, he thinks that he's a great man. And I won't let you disparage Your mind. No, I'm Not disparaging. He's like, he's a certain niggas. And so it became motherfucker. He was soybean. Okay. Anyway, he, he thinks the vaccine will be very effective. And even if you, if it doesn't keep you from getting it, it'll prevent or hopefully prevent you from getting a bad case of it. I don't know though. So, so w what would you need, would you, would you, would you need just the consensus of a body of doctors you trust And people's experiences because people have already taken it. And so if people have taken it, like, what is the experience? And they say that they, you know, had, they felt like shit for a few days.


That's it now, is that true? I mean, who are they? Have you talked to them? What's a few days. And what do you mean by feel like shit? Like, did you try running four days later and you still felt terrible? Like, So it, apparently they're distributing this vaccine almost now. Right? I don't think it's totally right, But it very soon we'll be ready. And if it's effective, they're going to encourage people to take it. It's it makes me They going have it for like doctors and like essential people. Yeah. First, and then it's going to probably people that are high risk. Yeah. But the thing is, it's going to have people have a sense of, like, there is something that could be done now. Like it's a sense of hope. It's a sense of progress.


It's a sense of like, you know, when it was at one time and we didn't even have a thought of a vaccine now we got competitors and shit. So people to think different, Listen, if it works, we should take it just, but I know how people get real nervous like that. Fuck with vaccines. I told you that son, how do you feel about black people? Don't fuck with no vaccines? Well, I mean, I feel like it's inconclusive because your caveat was, I take it if I felt safe about it, or that's just the thing, don't you feel like that same way. Of course. But so now, you know, for the first time we're learning, we're learning how a drug, the process of a drug, you know, going through trials, we're learning this literally as a nation, we're all watching this thing, take platelets, an accelerated version of it and accelerated version of it.


Okay. Usually a vaccine takes multiple years to develop. Yeah. So this is a really quick to be able to have something this quick and turn it around. And I like those movies where they find a cure by the end. And you're like, Oh, that's bullshit. They doing it. Well, not a cure, but a vaccine, big deal. It's the good thing is Another one comes around. They're going to be more prepared to do something like this quicker, right? Like I think people needed to really Understand that in our lifetime, something can kill the world's economy and kill hundreds of thousands of people here and a million people worldwide. Wow. I think everybody understood. I think we knew it, but I don't think we really expected it. They knew what they w the Obama administration had prepared for precisely that eventuality.


But I mean, of course we couldn't wrap our mind around it, Even if they told you, even if you watch bill Gates, Ted talk in 2015, you would never internalize it and think there's, there's a pandemic coming. Now we know by Now we know there is now the, the, the we're going to want to invest in the medical infrastructure to make sure that they prepare better. Next time. This is, hopefully people are going to learn, Oh yeah. 100% people, no glasses, nothing. They're going to, nothing is going to be new. There's nothing going to be new about it. No. Well, the debate is, is largely philosophical, right? I mean, to this sense, there's two schools of thought one school of thought is it's just going to be what it's going to be.


And will you got to keep moving, like white clothes, anything. And the other school of thought, which I thought was, you know, it's more than just a philosophy. It was, it was a science, right? You remember the premise when they locked us up was we have to wait to catch up to our medical infrastructure. So we don't overburden our medical infrastructure. We got to suppress the disease till we can build up the infrastructure. And they gave us an early estimate of two weeks. This is how comedian does when a comedian is doing a real long send, goes, one more thing before I go. And then he does it four or five times. And he realized that was, guy's going to do another hour. Oh yeah. That's so fucking rude because that's what the pandemic corn team felt like two more weeks, three more weeks.


Maybe we'll open bars and re you know, that kind of shit, But there's no way to control it other than create it yourself. Right. What do you mean? Like the whole vibe of the scene, right? The vibe of which scene, the pandemic, you said, how do we get used to it? What can we do about it? Well, he's also saying here's the thing we never signed up to let people tell us that we can, and can't take risks or go to work. And by saying that, if you do it, you can to kill other people. That's what changed the game. Right? And so everybody has to figure out how much of that they're willing to accept and how much of that are they not? And whether or not they're willing to take a shot, take this, this vaccine without, you know, knowing the long-term effects of it or worrying about the longterm effects of it.


And some people are naturally averse to take any kind of medication. They don't want to do it. And other people are like, if you tell me it's good and all the doctors agree, and then it'll help mankind. I'll fucking do it. That's how I feel. If I listen polio, okay, shit doesn't exist anymore. Smallpox doesn't exist anymore. At least not in the numbers of it used to be right. You got to all <inaudible> Vaccines. Like the idea that vaccines have done bad things only, or that they're dangerous. Only it's crazy. Like vaccines are the responsible for the giant vaccine. So I think that at the core that says, you just trust the trust, these sources. And then people realize that they're at the mercy.


That was someone that they don't necessarily trust. Right. That's the, that's the rep. Well, maybe, maybe don't, don't touch your own face and don't go outside. I'll tell you when to come out. Set love of right now, liar. Yeah. Right. Tough one. That was a tough one. It's it? Especially here, it goes, something really touches something really. So in the core of, in American's identity, like you said, how can you tell me to do this? Yeah, it's crazy, man. This was a tough one here. So it makes us redefine what it is to be a person. You know, like if all of a sudden you have other people that got elected into a position of power, that's all they did. They won a popularity contest and they're dictating whether things go this way or that way.


And they don't necessarily have the right answer. They just have their own answer. And Dallas is doing a different that this town and, you know, Washington, state's doing it different than Nevada. Everyone's doing a different, But everybody's trying to do it also. Yeah. But Governors can tell you what you can and can't do. It gets real weird. And I get it. They're trying to keep the hospital numbers down, but you told us it was going to be two weeks. Like you guys said two weeks, and now here we are like nine months later. And everyone's just waiting for only for a vaccine, But I'm not speaking about, you know, the, if it's right, if it's wrong, not speaking about it like that, I'm just saying whatever it was. That was very difficult.


Yeah. That was very difficult. Very difficult. You know, I was fine, but not knowing when you can work, not being removed around, not being able to see my mother, you know, you, you would have never thought if someone had told me 11 months ago, even the night before they, the last night we went to where we were in Milwaukee. Yes. It was perhaps the last show, but it was the last night between shows, right? It's the two show night and the energy had changed. It went from festival to like, people look worried when I got off stage and Tom Hanks had had it, the one NBA guy who would touch everything and had it. And then the horn starts ringing that they're going to shut the country down. I literally go, that's impossible.


Shut. We're going to shut down the world. It's impossible. This is about, this is what I thought, my initial reaction. But the energy changed now, I go out and do the second show. And immediately, I wasn't even thinking about this shit earlier at night, I come out on stage and everybody reached your hand. Hey, I thought about it. Okay. I start shaking. People's hands. I'm worried. But yeah, it was. But the neighbor for even being concerned about it went into the green room for 40 minutes and talked to people. Who've been glued to the television, watching the news. And then they, they scared the shit out of me. My behavior changed almost instantly. It was interesting.


I want to get too heavy. I mean, I'm only hanging out with no, man. It's not too heavy. That's exactly how I felt about it too. I remember I shook a dude's hand on a flight. I was flying to Vegas for the fight. So it was like one of the last fights before they shut it down. And some dude goes, I don't know, you want to shake hands? Like, I'll shake your hand. We shook hands. He had a mask on already. And I was like, wow, he was ready to go down. He was, I think this was the very beginning of March. This was the first, the first time I would have been tested in any capacity was when I did show that time. That was the first time I had an antibody test or anything. I would have never expected that here we would be deep into November. And we're all still Kind of locked down.


When this started, he lived in LA. He had no plans to come here. Yeah. You didn't take your whole, your whole life has changed. What's interesting about this time. This is another thing we should talk about. Next time we come, is that the inmate, it feels like we're rewriting our social contracts. You know, the whole thing. And COVID is an accelerant on this process that I could have never imagined. Yeah. That's, you know, they'll, they're locked inside, man. People are stuck in a house with their choices. Do you like your house? Do you like who you're with? Do you like these things? You've accumulated. I hope you like them because you stuck with them.


I made great choices. I liked my choices. You know, when I was faced with it like that, it's like I had it much better than many people. But imagine people doing that in mass, it's pretty powerful. It's pretty powerful. What does this dude was society, this type of isolation and, And almost forced reflection. Yeah. Which is not necessarily a bad thing. Right? And we've always talked about how life is a rat race, right? People get just because he's stuck in this rat race, it feels never ending. It's not good that all these people lost their jobs. It's not good that all these people are going to lose where they live, but not at all. It might help. Some people recognize that if you just keep going in this rat race, it just, it never ends.


You got to figure out a way out. And now is a better time to figure out a way out than ever, because you kind of have to, you kind of have to and society as it existed, 10 months ago, The same plant, the same country. What's the country. That is a country. Maybe somewhere in South Pacific is something that measures the, their success as a nation, with what they call their gross national happiness. It's a totally different premise. What countries are, I can't remember. Maybe, maybe a Google gross national happiness, Jennifer. Thanks fingers. There is blue town. There you go. This is a real, this is a real principle.


It's a philosophy guys. The government thinks about this. This is a philosophy that guides the government of Bhutan and includes an index, which is used to measure the collective happiness. This is the metric that they use to define this success. If they try that in America, they turn into an app and it would fuck up everything. Oh my God, people would just be striving to win the points on the app. It would make people insane. They'd get addicted to try to be a better person. But this is, this is the vast thing. This is a vastly better metric. I'm not, you know, communist, none of that shit. But I think that I know too many people were very wealthy who had what? I considered a poor quality of life.


Because like you say, the wealth is the point. Yeah. They chased it. They chased it and they didn't have any friends. Right? You're very welcome. We are hunting. You love your dog. Your dog hangs out with you like fucking school. We do your kids likely to get kids like you, you you're living in adventure of a life. Now you're doing the same thing you were doing in LA in a totally different city jazz. Because you're following that knowing feeling, I gotta be free, whatever. There's a little bit of that. And then there's also like, I think you're better off living in a place with less people. I think even you live to be, you live in a place with like LA. It's great in that. There's a lot of resources. There's a lot of shit happening and there's a lot of people, but it's bad in that.


Sometimes people, it diminishes the value of people a little bit when there's so many of them like people stop thinking about PSA is valuable. I think that it's, it's that for me, the thing that, the thing that I always had a hard time with was the point of the place was show business. Yeah. So when I was coming up in my career, everything reminded me of the things I didn't have and nothing. Let me appreciate where I was. And then now I love it. It's a winner circle. I'm doing great. So I can get in any restaurant I got to get, you know, but I remember what it felt like being there. It's like, that's why I don't live there. No disrespect to LA, but it's like, if I like a restaurant, I don't move in and sandwich.


I just come. When I want to eat, I'm going to live in the restaurant. I think your, your idea of living in another place, it gives you perspective. There's no question. It's the best way to add perspective. If you're stuck in that showbiz world, you know, that becomes your culture, your, your culture is like this tiny fraction of the human beings in the world. And so many people just start relating only to people in that culture like that. You can get real isolated that way. Yeah. It's just not. Yeah. And, and for what we do for a living, I was at conducive to anything that we want to achieve Artistically. No, it's a very wise decision. Like really? What is it? Smells great.


That candle is the shit. I'll do a commercial for it right now. You cut this out. Hi, I'm Dave Chappelle. And this is a black Ash candle smells way better than it sounds. Take it from me. And as she Larry Bitch cut one take. That was beautiful. Gives me a light. Oh yeah, I'll do that. Get the st going. So when you tour now, do you just pick a city and say, Oh, I'm going to do Denver three nights in a row. Find me a venue. Well, I don't know if I want this on the show, but just between us. I don't know. I'm not trying to, we don't have to put anything on the show that, but I want to post up here for like, you know, few weeks it's cold in Ohio.


I like playing outdoors. I like this. Step's place a lot. Beautiful. It's rocking. So I kinda, that's why I said, well, we do damn thing. I'm thinking around December, January, stay here for four, six weeks. Try to finish the act that I was boy, I was close when we, when we were supposed to do those shows That summer was going to be fires. Me and Joe Rogan Went on sale with some tickets. And this is, this is jail. We must have sold 36,000 tickets in like 10 minutes. It was, it was insane. We were so excited to do the show and like a week or two before the shutdown happened, I was bought of that shit. So, and that was about to be nice. So once we did, we're fun too though.


What was it? The car? No, I've never seen you at bet. Remember we went and watched a once upon a time in Hollywood and all that One, two o'clock in the morning, that conversation we were there. That was when you know Seattle. That was, yeah, it was Tacoma. <inaudible> that was fun. That was fun. And the conversations we didn't have in the, in the green room, you know, every, every tour has its own culture, but the culture, this tour that we did together, it was great. Yeah. ENL was who was traveling with you, But he was always famine, man. He was always tired from not getting the right proteins, slept the whole joint side.


Yeah. Ian and I, the first time I had ever left the country, I was like 18. And my 19th birthday there in Scotland, I did the Edinburgh festival and Ian Edwards was on the festival doing show. And we, you know, black dudes from, from the West way West man, we hit it off. We would crack each other up. And the, and then bam, I just see him on the road, made me feel 20 years younger. And we, you know, we all sit around green room, the lights are red. Music's good. Really good vibes, really good company. It was, it was a perfect match. We nail it with the red lights in your room. It changes everything. I'm going to steal that from you though, man, man, please be my guest.


I'll go with purple. It's all about the <inaudible> because I used to just sit in a room with hard white lights and the fruit plate that I didn't know how long they've been there and no music. And you know, the early days, no friends, he just sitting in there and he was a baby, maybe a joke book, just waiting, waiting all the time, just waiting, just waiting. And at some point you realize, well, it's gotta be fun. I can't just be sitting in these rooms, looking at these walls like, well, who the fuck has to bring a book to work? Correct? It was that it was that right. So I just started sexing it up, like it just having fun. And, and then when you start getting big on the road, you start bringing your friends out and all that shit.


Then it gets really fun. And you become like a surrogate family. The longer you stay out together, you know, you learn each other's creature habits. You find out shit about each other. You don't know fuck about the shacks. I see what, what people made up, man. We had some of the road. Yeah. So much fucking fun. Yeah. He would love that Ohio shit day. You, that could have gone. But that's when I was planning on coming home at night, not doing any standup. I had my drone that night. Oh yeah. Yeah. We had my drone out. I don't even have to fly my own drone. One of my friends was flying the drone and it was late at night. He was like, yo, get the drone shot. So we get the drone shots. And then the drone went up in the air. It's like about two o'clock in the morning. And we thought we lost the drone.


We didn't see no red lights, no blue lights. It was just God. We was like, Oh shit, nigga. We got to go find a drone. We like, we about to get out of here. We thought we lost the drone. The drone was supposed to be at, at the bed and breakfast. How well can you control those things? Like the people that know how to drive it, they can control the where they can't see it through like measurements and distance and everything we had to. Was it good though? They had buttons on there. You know, they could track it, track a person or an object. If you wanted to just follow a car. Anything like that. Remember in LA, the paparazzi started doing all this crazy drone shit. I'm sure they got you. The weed, the drone guy. We had the drone shot. I was drinking coffee.


You hear the buzzing? Yeah. You hear the shit. And you know that there's a dude, a block away somewhere. Isn't that weird. Like they could, they could kind of find you now with a drone. We'll get the drone shot from the place we thought we lost it. We was going to go search. I was like, get my motherfucking drone nigga. Right? We get ready to get everybody to car, to go find his drone. We don't see this guy. Nowhere to all of a sudden decide. It was like a movie. We saw these blue lights come up and we heard this and that motherfucker came. Everybody was like, Oh shit, they going to drone. And that shit came all the way back. Down side. That was a great shot. I met the governor of Texas.


I went to the mansion to hanging out with him, governor Abbott and I had whiskey and barbecue with him. And while we're hanging out at his house, a drone comes by and hovers in the sky. The light goes on and we're watching this drone. The security guys are trying to figure out where the drones coming from and who's got the drone and it turned out to be like the fire department. Real, our department has their own drone and they're flying the drone around looking for stuff. That makes a lot of sense, man. But they they're like, that's like how you can spot fires, how they can figure out what's going on. If there's a, some sort of a car accident, they could probably send a drone out, get video image of it. So they know what to expect, how to get there. Make sense. Right. And there's a new car like that.


Some is that drone. The headlights are drones. You got to look this up, man. What is the headlights fly away? What do you mean? The headlights are attached to the car right there on if you get out of the car, they pop off and start flying around and make a path of light. That's that's I think that's the thing. Create an autonomous off-road or that uses flying drones to aluminate the road. Instead of headlights. Joel, the video. Why it's ill is fuck it's it's Oh, Oh my God. They're ahead of the car. Fucking Headlights are ahead of the car. It's the illest shit. I was thinking that's some star Wars shit, Right?


Yeah. Precision drones. If you have the key in your pocket, they'll follow you. Like if you're walking in the woods, it's crazy. That thing looks wild. It looks like some shit. Jamie Fox drives already. He already has one of those gas station. Five is probably over your heads. This, he has one of those <inaudible> isn't that? What it's called? It's like a reservoir tank. I ran into him at the gas station. I was like, who the fuck is driving? That thing. Fox. What's up? That thing looks awesome though. That Audi that's a slick looking car. It's crazy that there's somewhere online. There's a video demonstration and it's probably going to be electric, right? Yeah. Yeah. Is it?


Yeah. Everything's Electric. Now look at this. Look at this shit. It's that? Diane. Look at this. Look at this. Look at this. Watch when it's driving. Oh shit. That's a headlights. The headlights are ahead making the road bright. Yo that's some gangsta shit right there. So flying Like little UFO's. Could you imagine if you saw that drive by you somewhere? Yeah. It'd be like, Oh my God. I think I saw an alien. That's crazy. That's Going to be the future. Look at that shit. They fly ahead of you and aluminate the road. That's bananas. And you just have to trust them with your little bitch ass lights. You got some little piggy ass fog lights.


You have to trust the daddies that are flying around. That's how the government's going to control you. And I don't want to keep you going on their road. No, no, no. You don't want to look at that road. That was dark. The drones only go on this road. Come on son. We've got to get pizza. Probably a pizza place. Finally. Oh man, you started like this, man. Why are you doing this to me? We'll find a pizza place for you. What do you, what kind of pizza you want? I could get a pizza. Pizza, pizza pizza. A piece of pizza. A piece of pizza. Yeah. Pizza. Pizza. I got to get some more gauze to man. Let's take five. One gives me. Yeah. Yeah. We can just, we can just end this.


It's already four


35. We've been doing this forever. Oh. And I've been doing this for four and a half hours. I know, man. He'd been disrespected. My gunshot wound. I told Jamie I didn't write never. This is not true. None of this is true. The dream work. Thanks Dave. That was fun. Oh my God. For real, for real, for real. Yeah, for sure. A hundred percent. I would love it. Thank you, Donald. That was fun. Thank you. Thanks for the candle. Thanks for the cream. Thanks for everything. Thanks for everything. Donna RFK stadium, RFK stadium, DCM profit, traditional Thanksgiving show. And the date is November 28th and Pixar's soul comes out Christmas day. Disney plus keep people focused on the show. What? The 28th Joe, you keep disrespecting me, man. Come and see you. The, you say it. I'm trying to find out where the tickets are. There it is right there it is. Oh, so drive in comedy at RFK. No, I'm trying to promote your show. So park up D c.com. So go to park up dc.com. It's the 28th. Your traditional? Yes. That's Saturday. Thank you, sir. Thank you. I enjoyed it. Oh, I love you too. I love your dog. She's awesome. All right, bye everybody. Thank you, friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you to manscaped and their awesome lawn mower. 3.0 ball, hair Wacker. It is in fact, the shit go to manscape.com/rogan and you'll get 20% off and free shipping. So 20% off with free shipping at manscaped.com/rogan and make sure your balls look like a Turkey's next for this. Well, it doesn't work. If you say it twice, make sure your balls look awesome for this upcoming Thanksgiving with landscape. And if you want, you can make them look like a Turkey snack, I guess, add a special touch to your holiday season with the brightness of blue moon blued, blued. Fuck. Let me do the whole thing again. Thank you also to blue moon beer, their distinctive beer. Get blue moon delivered by visiting. get.blue moon beer.com to see your delivery options. Add a special touch to your holiday season with the brightness of blue moon, brewed with Valencia orange peel for a unique, vibrant taste reach for the moon. Celebrate responsibly blue moon brewing company, golden Colorado ale. We're also brought to you by Traeger grills. My absolute all time. Favorite way to cook. You can buy them online or in 10,000 plus stores nationwide. Visit Traeger grills.com/joe and use the code Rogan at checkout for free shipping. And we're brought to you by the mother fucking cash app. Download the cash app from the app store or the Google play store today. And when you do download the cash app, make sure you enter the referral code. Joe Rogan, all one word, you will receive $10 and the cash app will send $10 to our good friend. Justin Wren's fight for the forgotten charity building Wells for the Pygmies in Macondo. Thank you much love to you all bye-bye <inaudible>.