
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode of the podcast is brought to you by Trager grills. I'm not even going to read the ad because I use a trigger four to five nights a week. I fucking love it. I've been using a trigger long before the response for the podcast. It's just an awesome way to cook it uses wood and fire, but it does it in a really complicated and well-engineered way. It's a pellet grill. What a pellet grill is is they use sawdust so when they cut oak or cherry Or you know any Hickory they take that sawdust and they compress it using the natural sugars in the wood no additional chemicals at all and they create these little pellets you pour these pellets into the hopper and the trigger Grill and the grill does all the rest the grill feeds those wooden pallets threw a worm drive to a heating element Sparks up a fire and boom you got fire and wood but it maintains a perfect temperature super well insulated.


It just really well engineered and designed Sign with an amazing application. They have this why fire app and through this app. You can control the grill. You can control the temperature. It's going to meet throughout thermometer in it. So it'll tell you the temperature your meat it'll set alarm to let you know when it hits the desired temperature maintains the temperature amazingly well also the app has 1500 plus recipes and it will control the cook cycle through the app. So if you have a recipe that calls for a certain temperature for a certain amount of minutes and then you shift A higher lower temperature later. It does all that. It's amazing. They make their own wood pellets. They own their own Lumber Mills.


The wood pellets are all made the United States and the grill. Like I said is absolutely my favorite way to cook. It makes delicious food that Smoky delicious flavor and it's super simple to use. It's available online or you can get a trigger Grill in one of 10,000 Plus stores nationwide. There's a bunch of different designs a bunch of different models. I use the Timberline 1300 it's huge. It's awesome. I can't say enough good things about it. Visit Trager grills.com Joe. That's T R8 e GE R, gr. I ll s Trager grills.com Joe and use the code Rogan at checkout for free shipping on the best grill known to man.


Another ads. It's easy for me to use our easy for me to do because I use our products every day is CBD MDI take CBD MD's products. Single day of the week. I'm a huge believer in CBD. It's amazing for reducing inflammation aches and pains and things along those lines. It's also great for alleviating anxiety. It's just good for General overall health a lot of people that I know that have had joint pain problems and arthritis issues swear by CBD. I am one of those people I love it. I've had problems of talking about this my toe joints from kicking and think CBD is completely cured it. I love their CBD topicals for for muscle soreness.


They have two different ones that I really enjoy CBD fries with Menthol which is awesome. And it comes with a roller which I really like a roll-on and I use that role on a kind of dig it into my muscles and massage. It's fantastic stuff and also CBD recover which combines CBD with the blood flow enhancing compound histamine die hydrochloride it temporarily relieves minor aches and joint pains and aches and muscle pains and Gives you support where you need where it matters most and to make it easier for you to try this amazing Duo of topicals or everything else is CBD MD has to offer they're offering JRE listeners 25 percent off your next order when you use the promo code Rogan at checkout again, I use this stuff every day super high quality stuff CB D MD.com use the promo code Rogan Rog an4 25 percent off your purchase.


Purchase of their Superior CBD products from CB D MD. We're also brought to you by butcher box butcher box makes it easy for you to get high-quality humanely raised meat that you can trust they deliver 100% grass-fed grass-finished beef free range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood directly to your door. It's an awesome company with awesome value. The average cost is less than $6 per meal. And there's a ton of flexibility. We've got different box options and delivery frequencies to fit your needs and you can cancel at any time with no penalty.


You can choose your box options. They have five different boxes for curated box options as well as the popular custom box. So you can get exactly what you and your family love for me. That's what I like. I use I use the custom box and I get grass-fed grass-finished Ribeyes, which is absolutely my favorite super high quality. And for the quality of you're From butcher box. It's difficult to find in a lot of places. If you don't have a real high-end grocery store and you're just not going to get it at the price of butcher box offers it for and with a super high quality again, and they ship it directly to you. They freeze it at the peak of freshness and they vacuum seal it and it's packed an eco-friendly 100% recyclable boxes and you can enjoy high quality meat delivered to your door and much more time for amazing meals together.


Yay, and butcher box is proud to partner with people who believe leave in better honoring nature animals and the land that they work to give cattle room to graze. They work to make sure that all of the meals that they serve you are humanely raised the the cattle are a hundred percent grass-fed and free to roam on pastures. They raise hogs on pastures or in hoop Barnes free to do it Hogs. Do they ensure the chickens have outdoor access with no cages no crates, no crowding and they uphold strict fishing and handling practices when it comes to wild caught salmon. Dana be harvested Seafood. So for a limited time offer this amazing company is going to offer you a free Thanksgiving turkey when you sign up for butcher Box by going to butcher box.com Rogan.


That's butcher box.com Rogan to get a free turkey in your first order and we're also brought to you by 4 Sigma attic and they're delicious coffee with lion's mane and chaga. It's coffee. The but is actually good for its coffee with nutritious mushrooms, and it's got about 50 percent less caffeine than regular coffee. It tastes good. It doesn't taste like mushrooms but is actually nutritious for you. It has lines made mushroom, which is my personal favorite mushroom. I take their lion's mane Elixir as well. I like to mix it up in a bottle of water but lion's mane is a mushroom that supports productivity and creativity.


It's great for the brain and they also include chaga which is Known as the king of mushrooms from for immune support and again doesn't taste like mushrooms taste like coffee and all of forcing Matic products are organic vegan and gluten-free. Every single batch is tested in a third party lab for heavy metals allergens bad bacteria yeast Moulds mycotoxins and pesticides all to ensure their purity and safety so that you know that you are getting the highest quality coffee and shrooms possible with four Sigma. Attic best of all for Sigma attic stands by their products unconditionally with a 100% money back guarantee love every sip or get your money back.


This month for Sig Matic is running a special sale. You can stock up on everything you need to support your immune system with up to 50% off to claim this deal. You must go to for Sig Matic.com / Rogan. This offer is only for Jerry listeners. It's not available on the regular website. Go to fo you are a IGM atic.com Rogan and get yourself some delicious and nutritious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out. My guest today is one of my best friend's is guy. I've gone on the road with for many many years. He is the host of The Kill Tony podcast and he's a fantastic stand-up comedian.


Please give it up for the Great and Powerful Tony Hinchcliffe The Joe Rogan Experience. Train by day Joe Rogan podcast By Night. Hello. Good to see you in the right side of America feels good out here feels good right whole different feel feels normal. Yeah, people aren't terrified. Correct. They got everybody scared as fuck and California. It's horrible man. Everything shut down Everything feels bad. It's sad. It is sad important. The more businesses are completely closed the satyr it is is seeing stuff that you know, Yeah in the memories that you have there.


It's also I think it's harder to bounce back in big places. I think it's harder for big places to bounce back because you get like all these stores closed down like all the stores. They got hit hard with the Looting on Melrose. Like they're still closed right mode any of them come back? Yeah. Yeah, when you drive down the last time I was there it's like boarded-up boarded up or it up for lease for lease for lease and like this takes a long time to come back. It feels That way for sure some places are open but it's not the same Vibe. Yeah, I was here. They're not interested in shutting things down the same way, especially the governor. He's like we got to keep businesses open and he's right but you can do it safely.


I mean, I think you could do it safely here better than California because there's lower numbers. There's less people. It's not just you know, everyone's on his smooshed in together and everyone's more relaxed because of that it makes you realize when you come to a place that has less humans. It makes you realize like oh, that's better. Like this plenty of people out here. It's not like we're in the farms in the country in the middle of nowhere in the mountains. It's not like that. It's a city but it's a less populated city and everything's just a little more. Yeah relaxed LA's giant County. Yeah it people think it's a city and it's just a massive huge place and it's mush is in with Orange County, which is even more populated, right?


Yeah. No. No, he's probably more popular than Orange County but County so dense though, there's the traffic and Orange County on the 405 is mind-blowing. It's mind-blowing like when you're driving down to San Diego and you just like we're all these people coming from right? There's so many of them the north till I went up to Pebble Beach couple weeks ago at traffic's just crazy to me six Lanes. You're all in with the golfing. Look at you unbelievable trip to Pebble Beach. I'm telling you dude. It's the greatest thing out of nowhere. I went to go smoke pot with my buddy Pete one day and then You know, he's like em Golf and I'm like great. I'll smoke pot with you there. I figured I would just drive the cart and have fun rest is history addicted.


I caught myself the other day watching thing on the TV like golf lessons or whatever and at the same time I was on my iPad on YouTube not realizing I was doing two at once learning how to chip. It's so much very dangerous. That's why I never played. Why is it dangerous? Because it's a suck of time. It sucks time. Not that it's bad people enjoy it and as far as like activities at suck time, I mean at least you're walking around you're out in nature. You have all that beautiful green grass, you know, this is there's positives to it. It's definitely an interesting thing to suck time because it gives me energy and when I'm away from it, I can think more clearly about everything else.


It's like it. Very meditative. You're always thinking about your next shot or your last shot what you did wrong what you could have done better for the next one. So it's like when I'm out there, it's I'm not looking at my phone for four or five hours, which is great. I'm not thinking about anything else so that when I do afterwards and you know normally most days if I don't do that, I sort of like crash out around evening time, but if it's a golf day, even if I'm up at 6 5 7 a.m. I have energy all day all night after that. Those are the best days now. Yeah, it's probably like every like Archer. He's like that. It's a meditative.


Yeah, it helps clear your mind because it's so difficult, right you're concentrating so hard on each individual Putt and shot. That's it. Right? Yeah, we call him shots drives. It depends on what you're shooting the driest about your knowledge. Yeah. The drive is from the T. That's the first shot that's power. Hopefully some accuracy or aiming for the middle that Artists get good at no potting is the hardest really? Yeah, what about miniature golf ball touch that putting's the most like archery miniature golf isn't really the same. No on the golf course, there's no windmill to knock it back at ya like it up that ramp that ramps narrow the ramp. Yeah the rattle. Yeah get to the windmill, right?


You gotta get it in the Clowns mouth just like at Pebble Beach. Like, excuse me where your clown there's no other sport that's worth millions of dollars. If you're the best that also has a miniature version that little kids play right? I feel fucked-up version with all like bumpers everywhere and weird holes and it's fun now song concrete with fucking fake grass over it, right? Yeah, there's no I guess those bumper pool but pools not pulls not nearly as popular as golf in terms of terms of money, you know. Yeah golfers. Make Place legit Kappa, right Cindy Shambo, you know, that is powerful dryer hundred 23 yard drive that is Insanity that's so far.


He did this on purpose that there's like a interview recently about him because he's been getting popularity. He like decided to like get jacked. He hits it 40-50 yards farther than Tiger Woods ever did Jesus. So he's just decided to get really big. He looks like a football player. Who's that one? Dude that does the thing at the driving range is where he steps his leg up in the air like he's throwing a pitch and then he steps forward and crazy torque. He's got this crazy movie does wear lifts his leg. Ugh up and then he steps into it and wax it yeah, he's there's videos of them on YouTube. We've actually talked about it before I don't think he's hitting it that far though. I don't think anybody sitting at 423 maybe some billiard Pro driver guy. But yeah, this guy's a freak will also this guy's accurate means if right he's hitting it exactly in the middle of look where it lands and he just won the Masters.


I do believe it's going on right now when the US Open. Yeah the US Open and what's crazy about him. So what's crazy about the sport of golf is that that's your first Shot and then after that touch as you get closer to the whole touch becomes so much more important. So this guy can do that and you can also make a ten-foot putt that has a hill from right to left and then bends from left to right like the into there's a comparison I guess to pull the brake shot. Yeah, you know, like some guys have crazy break shots like with a lot of power and then afterwards it's a touch and finesse game right and some guys might get in their head on the eight ball, which is every hole every pot. Yeah. It's the most frustrating. Ting yet rewarding part also you guys you're not playing a flat surface you got little Hills you have to like Look At You Gotta Get Low and try to figure out where you hit it on the hill to make it drop it in the hole and in the morning because the ground is moist especially in California, they water everything and then you're just in a desert.


So if you start at say 7:00 or 8:00 a.m. It's pretty straight. Like there's not a and also it's slower because it's what right and by 10:00 11:00. Well, once the heat kicks up things are moving much faster, if you have to adjust throughout the day for from slow to fast and all these things so it changed every hole literally changes as goes on. Yeah, that does the same with pool with moisture. If you're playing in a place that has a lot of moisture like some of the best players on Earth come from the Philippines and what happened is soldiers. I believe in the second world war brought over to the Philippines pool.


They taught them pool. And they play a lot of pool outside. So they have these outside areas like chickens running around and shit and they're playing pool like a lot of open-air pool tables and it's obviously it's an island. So it's near the ocean's probably a lot of humidity in the air and the tables. They also have this weird thing they do with a poor powder on the rails. So like they have like baby powder because the tables gets everything gets so slick because it's wet and sweaty and sticky and moist so they put baby powder near the pockets and they all The baby powder on their fingers and then you know the Q runs smoothly through your hand, but then you're always touching the table. So you put in baby powder all over the table. So table gets really dirty. So they're playing on these like dirty slow wet tables and so they develop these like real fluid Strokes because they're so used to having to power the ball around these discussing tables like not disgusting but this you would be upset if you play it on a table like that in America.


You see why don't you guys clean the table? But over there they don't give a fuck also, they Don't give a fuck if there's a bunch of people around the table. So they have these games and I watch these games. Like if you looked at my YouTube feed dude fucking laugh because like the suggested videos the vast majority of them are Filipino pool. I watch Ephraim Reyes. If you look at Jeff Garlin production, Jeff Garlin is a guy who films it's not like simple stuff. They film it like what tripod and cell phone and then they just film these pool man. This and people get obsessed with watching. And for Ray is play these Young Guns in the Philippines - Rands is probably the greatest pool player of all time, like pretty widely regarded.


He liked the Hicks and Gracie of pool and he's playing these any Pacquiao right? Maybe I was a killer by the way, you think Manny Pacquiao's a killer pool player. Really? Oh God world-class like Manny Pacquiao could play professional. Wow. Yeah. Yeah, like he Gamble's with professionals. Yeah, my friend Max Eberly. Who's you met Max Max? I know you have he's a legit Pro like Max is like world champion caliber Pro and he's gambled with Manny Pacquiao. And he said Manny Pacquiao is good. He says you have to really bear down to beat him like they play a race to 10. He might beat manly because Max is world-class, but he might be pinning like 10 to 7 or 10 to 6.


Where is he beat me like 10 to 1 or tended to like man. He's much better than me. He's really good. He's better than you at pool. Yeah, he's legit. There's many right there. Yeah, dude. He that will get a little kick that ball in son. Wow and get position on the six. He's he's super legit super legit and he's got a great stroke and he's also left-handed. I think there's a thing about left-handed people and I say this as a right-handed person, I think generally they're better at shit. Yeah, I agree my one of my best golf buddies who helps me get a lot better because he's great. Look how good he is dude, seriously. Seriously, look how fucking good as he bumped the eight. I don't know if he got position on the five there. He might have fucked that up, but he plays really good.


Yeah, like like like I said if I saw him in a tournament and I didn't know as Manny Pacquiao, I'd be like, oh this guy's really good. He's a pro is essentially a pro, but that's also because he's from the Philippines in the Philippines. Look how good he gets look perfect position on the seven watch this 7 to the eighth eighth to the 10 and he's out 10 ball. Watch this pop. If you watch how he Strokes the ball like everything super precise and because position that's he's a professional let go let go legit. Professional so if Manny decides to retire from from fighting and goes into professional pool, he might win some World Championships like no bullshit mean he's still fighting actively.


They're actually talking about him fighting Conor McGregor right now, which is kind of Bonkers do that gets out beautiful position. Why do you say it's kind of Bonkers? Because you think my animal Gregor dominate Connor. Is that a question? You don't even one of the greatest boxers of all time. I agree against the guy with one professional boxing match. I agree and I'm a huge Manny Pacquiao fan, but I believe it the other week. I wasn't re-watched McGregor Mayweather since it's been like done. I just moves on my show time app, and I wanted to watch some boxing it popped up and I clicked on it and I did not remember I remembered Shocking me with how good he did.


I did. Not remember it being as close as it truly was. Let me explain something. Yeah, the reason why it was close is because Mayweather let him blow his blog right? He's let him look he clipped Mayweather with legit legit left uppercut early in the fight and I was kind of stunned I was like, wow, that's really legit. Watch this. Here we go. See what Connor Italy that if you see it watch this left uppercut if you see if it's really quick. So let's rewind a little bit. So just so I can see it because it's really really good. I mean look at that left uppercut. Here's the thing Mayweather how to figure out Connors timing because what Connor is Connor is not a professional boxer.


Okay. So because he's not a professional boxer. He's not as efficient and he's going to get tired easier Mayweather is one of the greatest if not the greatest boxer of all time. I say there's a real good argument. He's a greatest of all time because he's undefeated 50 know and really only been hurt by Sugar Shane Mosley and Maidana two guys and a spectacular career 50 and the oh and just gets hit less than anybody and he's super smart about how he sets up fights. He sets up one of these he does his tox a mess of shit and gets everybody wanting to root for him to lose. He'll show you all his rolls royces his show you all this money to show you always watches. And everybody's like he's going to go broke.


He's gonna go broke, but he never does he keeps making money the games making money. So because if you look at his style, he's he's got a brilliant style. His style is take the minimal amount of damage find your openings and then establish your game and then Dominate and that's what he's done to everybody. That's what he did to Manny Pacquiao and their fight and you know, Manny Pacquiao apparently had a fucked-up shoulder, but that's what he did to Ricky Hatton dominated Ricky Hatton with the time was You know one of the best in the world and a guy that a lot of people were interested in seeing how he would do against me Mayweather and then the second fight with Maidana you get to see the Brilliance of Mayweather because you know, you got clipped in the first fight.


So he digested all of my Donna's movements and what he did wrong on the first flight in the came out in the second fight and just put on a clinic. He's the best of all time. Yeah, but Connor is a freak. He's an explosive guy. He's so fast and there's no Remedy for that right other than getting a guy tired. So what Mayweather was doing was boxing with them but preserving being safe got clipped a couple times realize that Connor can punch card punch, but just drag them into deep water drag him into deep water. And that's what a guy like Mayweather would do. He's the most he's the most intelligent in terms of his overall strategy to preserve his health yet to always win.


I mean, he's the most intelligent. He's so good, you know. All the greats have suffered losses and setbacks and except him. Yeah step hem. We don't even know what it's like, I mean, I don't even know how he would recover. We know he's had tough fights. He sets a couple of tough fights, but dude, he's so goddamn good. He's so protected. He knows where to be him. We're not to be he's so composed like look at that. Look at that. Look at that movement. Look how he moves away from everything. So you're punching it are and you're still threatening, but you're not really hit nominees making you throw punches. And occasionally clip them with a shot as he's moving away and he rolls with a lot of shit. So it's really you got to be a guy like like Sugar Shane Mosley clipped them really clipped them like really hurt him and he just grabbed ahold of him and held onto him and eventually started kicking sugar chains ass just took time.


He's if you're a young boxer and you want to know what it's like to be a 41 year old and still be at the top of your game. You got to be like him or like Bernard Hopkins when Bernard Hopkins was at the top of his game. He was older he was like in his 40s. Like he was I think he was 36 when he beat Felix Trinidad and a lot of people like Bernard done. It's over Felix Trinidad Tito Trinidad is the future and he let Felix Trinidad on fire and then the same thing with Kelly Pavlik. He licks LEP not expecting that we were expecting that to be Kelly Public's big like return hmm. He got some mashed Bernard Hopkins is a National Treasure. Yeah. He's because what he lagoo that kind of Pops him with that jab and that was uh, Comfortable but it's like he's look how calm he is stopped back that up backed it up a second.


Look how goddamn calm his watch his jab. Come to Floyd's face. He doesn't even blink it touches him in the nose, but he knows it's not going to hurt him. Look at this. Watch this. Look at this. Look at this. He doesn't even move. Wow, he doesn't even move. He's a master of distance. He really is a master of distance. Bernard was a master of distance to and Bernard was a different kind of style different kind of defensive style Bernard. Like would frustrate guys a lot of clinch with them tie you up make it very physical and guys get real frustrated and they didn't know what to do and they just want to fucking start winging punches and then you get right in your face again and clinched a hold of you but then break with you and catch you with a left hook break catch with the right hand always defensive always protect always disciplined, you know, frustrating your opponent in boxing's one of the interesting things right like Holyfield Tyson, it's crazy.


Everybody remembers the ear bite but not a lot. Of people talk about the massive amount of clenching and headbutts that Holyfield was landing on him in that fight. Oh, yes, very clear when you watch it again. Well, the head butts are interesting. It's like the question is did he do it on purpose and that's what Tyson was saying that he's doing this on purpose. He's trying to cut me and he's cut my face and cut Tyson and that's when tights a bit his ear and Tyson's idea at the time least was that he was doing it on purpose, you know, but it's also like Style Style to get it put his face put his head on your Your chest, you know, put his forehead on your chest and just make it a test of Wills. Like very few human beings have the kind of will that Evander Holyfield as if you ever watch the Riddick Bowe fights.


Yeah. Those are crazy to watch because Riddick Bowe was way bigger than Holyfield. You gotta remember Holyfield is a Cruiserweight Champion so Holyfield, I want to say he fought light-heavyweight in the Olympics. I might be wrong about that. I want to say he fought at like 176 in the Olympics. Finally for that is to have a subscription when I was a kid the Ring magazine. Oh, yeah, it was Bible of boxing son. Yeah, they have a lineal heavyweight belt. They give out their own belt. Like the ring belt is prestigious as any other belt WBC WBO. It is a red white and blue side straps.


Yeah. It's got like crazy Ruffles to it and like old-school looks like something Jack Johnson would have wore so cool the coolest it's weird. How do I cool trophies and stuff? Things get weird. Like I was thinking about that the other day about the Green Jacket the Masters I give you a weird. Basically the ugliest jacket. It's like it's you're such a badass. Yeah. We're discussing Jack. Yeah, and you see those guys when they're all together. It's like like they're like so happy to be wearing these ugly jackets together and diamonds Rolexes. We're in a gross jacket. Yeah, that's his first professional pilot light heavy, but right before that.


That he was listed around age 21 at 178 which is around the time. He was an Olympic so so so I'm probably fought at light heavyweight. So it's for if his first professional fight was light heavyweight and then he went on to be the Cruiserweight Champion. He bead Dwight Muhammad Cowie who used to be Dwight Braxton Dwight Braxton was this fat guy was five seven two hundred pounds. He was a tank just at and he would come at you like real low. He would get in a Crouch and guys be like what the fuck he'd be like way down. Here and it's just fucking jacked and he was another guy out of prison. So just tough as shit like Bernard Hopkins Bernard Hopkins learned a lot of his discipline but being locked up.


He's like I never want this to happen to me again. There's a famous story about Bernard leaving prison and one of the guards saying you'll be back and he's like, not me bitch. I'm Bernard Hopkins one of the fuck. I'm gonna be a world champion and I'm gonna get this get this chapter out of my life and went on. To be one of the most disciplined boxers ever. That's why he was able to compete deep into his 40s. He lost to Joe Smith. I think it was 51 when he lost his final fight and Joe Smith Jr. Is just fucking Savage like one of those Barbarian construction workers who still has a full-time job and still fight to the world class level. Scary Savage Savage human being did you see the fighter who had his jaw split and I and fought for like four more rounds with it, but the boss isn't the bottom man.


That happens breaks in half right here and it goes up and down. Oh Jesus. Look at look how its drop down. This had happened in the second round and they kept fighting he wanted to fight but they had to like tell him. Hey your jaw's broken. That's not good. Well the problem my God, that's so let's so broken. The problem is that will tear all the tissue in there and it'll never heal, right? Oh my God engineman Hussein from Australia who hit him. Ben Mahoney I said it this lava thought it just dislodged his mouthpiece and then a bunch of Blood start coming out. There was a woman who had that in an MMA fight Kim coat, or she was Randy Couture's wife at the time and her jaw did the same thing drop down.


You can see it moving in. Oh my God. That is crazy. That's crazy. Look at the oh my God. Oh my God. Good Lord. Can you imagine the headache the next day? Sot/video of a lion that got kicked by a gazelle had a broken. Jaw. That's that's some hard shit to look at because you like wow, this is not gonna last there's no recovering from that right now. They are lying to you can't evils right? No lion Hospital Lions have one shot at getting injured it get injured once in their life, and then it's over. So how long do you think they last after an injury like that dead dead within a couple weeks usually started death.


You think I want to starve to death. If you can't eat you think the lion keeps thinking you think they have like memories and they're like that fucking gazelle that fucking cuz they know I think they hold no grudges. Right I think grudges are connected to cognitive function like our ego our understanding of ourselves. That's how I'm gonna get him back because it's like ego. I don't think animals have an ego. They have they have a sense of fair though animals have a sense of Some animals to at least chimps do one of the reasons why chimps attack people is because if people give something to someone else and they don't give it to them. They have a real sense of fairness. Yeah, there's a famous story of this guy who had a pet champ and then the thing about Champs is you can keep them when they're young and then they get older and it's like a man but a man that's five times stronger than you and like.


Why is he going to listen to you? He's not going to listen to you. So I think you start biting off fingers. It's one of the things The Chimps do With chips get mad at you their bite off your finger and just let you know. They're the boss. Like don't give a fuck. If you're injured. They have no remorse, right and they're intelligent. So you have this thing's not a dog. It's not a person. It's this weird in-between thing. It's an animal but it's also intelligent and so when you do something for someone else, but you don't do something for them. They get rage like horrific rage. So this guy gets rid of this chimp brings it to a shelter. The shelter takes it in and he goes to visit it every year and the chimp goes to see him like, oh my friend. I miss you. I miss you. I can't I come home, but he can't come home ever because he would just take over the house.


Right? Because he's a grown gently. They don't castrate chimps the way they castrate dogs like you when you castrate a dog like everybody its standard people think it's good. Oh, did you get your dog neutered? Yeah. I did. They like you want your dog to have no testosterone. You want your dog to have no balls, but then it becomes a different thing then it's like tired and like Like if you ever seen a dog get snipped I had one of my dogs get sniped at when it was five years old. He's just too aggressive and so someone talked me into it and then when I got him stamped also news just tired all the time. He's lazy and I realized that all we didn't have any testosterone anymore. It's all gone Mike. Wow looks so the dogs a different dog now so you can't do that chips for whatever reason you can't do that.


You can't do it hurts him. So this guy goes to visit. He brings a birthday cake, happy birthday buddy, and the other chimps that are in cages right next to her like Like this motherfucker didn't bring me a cake. I can't believe this shit so they figure out a way to get out and they got out and they attacked the man and they tore him apart. They tore his face off it tore his dick off it towards feet off. They bid his fingers off. It's one of the most horrific cruel attacks, you'll ever hear of because they did it to try to take away from him. The things he wants and needs a chimps recognize. You need your fingers in order to do things your face in order to see you need your dick in order to fuck. So that's the They go after fucking assholes.


They don't drink they don't try to kill you. They try to take away what it means to be a human. So if you try to hide your hands, they'll pull your hands away from open them up and bite them off like crazy with rage filled look in their eye and they don't communicate with language. So they only have this sense in their head or what's fair and what's not fair and what you've done to them. So if you do something that makes them jealous, they think immediately you've done something bad to them. They don't I think that no no, I just gave my friend a cake. You made them feel bad. So it's you you made them feel bad. So they go right after you so it's but it's like a sort of a it's an interesting study in the way.


Sometimes people look at things like we've all been jealous, right? You've been jealous of someone you see someone who's doing something. Well your oh, I wish I was that guy but you don't go it Tak that person right people recognize like it's not his fault that I feel bad that He has this Corvette. I have to just fuck. I just got appreciate the guys hustle guys out there kicking ass. All right, I got to get my shit together. But there's a thing that we have initially especially when their children we feel angry like you feel upset like you feel like you've been shorted like someone's why didn't I get that this is bullshit. He gets it and I don't it's a fascinating part of humans and then humans As we get older and more sophisticated with language, but still carry the same child as motions.


We find reasons to be upset at someone for being successful. We find reasons Eat the Rich, you know, we find these by these weird little ways, we can justify our jealousy lure our anger or add our disdain for those who are more successful than we so it's like a we're coming up with complicated sophisticated ways to justify these Primal behaviors that Exhibit in just violent rage. So this guy to famous case like this, you can see the pictures. If you want to see the pictures of the cake guy of the guy who got his face ripped apart and fingers bitten off. And yeah, I mean he was in hospital. That sounds great. Did you think the Folks At Home Folks at home prepared?


Don't show them the screen because it's rough but Tony needs to see this. So you go give a tramp a cake. Yeah. I'm not doing that. This is wow. No nose. See how he bit his nose off God. Yeah. Look at his face. Oh, oh shit. Yeah, if it is consciousness after this happened. Oh, yeah, of course look is see his right hand the fingers bitten off. I've said they do they bite off your fingers. That's the champ right there to click on the chin of the right hand corner that says chimp. What does that picture? I'm surprised you let him keep his ears. Oh, that's a guy's face Jamie. That's what that is. He's got a trach because he can't breathe out of his mouth. Yeah. Well, I don't think you know, Chimps exactly know the human anatomy all that well, but they know what's important to you your face your fingers fucking to help toward the sky part.


So if he would have brought pieces of cake and given them to all the chimps and all the cages if they're all be happy. Yeah, but they're also angry that he's that their captive. So when they get captive look being captive for a chimp is probably a similar feeling as to what it would be to be captive as a person right if you see a chimp at the zoo. You're you're in this big there in this big containment. They always monkey bars and stuff they could hang on but there's a bunch of people staring at them like all day long people are staring at you through glass and there's a ceiling like there's a net over the top so you can't go over the top and it's fences and you just like fuck every day is boring. Nothing happens. Nothing happens every day.


There's no Lions. There's no no fruit to go pick. There's no places to go journey to to explore like chimps travel around man. They don't just sit in. One particular 100-yard area for the rest of their life and it's not even a hundred yards right you go to the LA Zoo. You see how small that enclosure is? Yeah. I went to the LA Zoo once really high really high like on an edible. Yeah, and I wrote a piece on my website called animal prison. I was like because it made me feel I could because you know when you're really fucking super baked you're sensitive to everything. Yeah, but just I recognize how depressed.


Thinking about myself and thinking about you know, I'm gonna go to the zoo and see the monkeys I went there and I immediately felt sadness. I was like, oh no these poor creatures like they don't want to be here. Like, what are we doing? Like we can't do this. I was thinking like I gotta get out of here. It's Trail now, you're right and it's very bizarre. Same thing with SeaWorld same thing with all those places. See world's worst. Yeah, because they're a smart as us. If not smarter. Yeah. We don't we don't even really know. How smart. Art orcas are right because or Dolphins because we put them in these weird categories like how much emails do they send do they make houses? No, they must be stupid. But they have a cerebral cortex is 40% larger than ours.


We don't know how smart they are. They also they communicate they have a weird sophisticated language that we can't decipher. We can't decipher it. We don't know what their language is. They've been able to recognize specific accents. So they know there's like, you know, like there's a Southern accent and Cleveland accent there's a Chicago accent orcas have accents like we can tell this by the sound. Oh, this is an orca from Alaska or this is an orca from Seattle. Yeah, it's crazy. It's fucking nuts man. Meanwhile, we put them in a swimming pool a fucking swimming pool. So sad how their fin droops or rest. It's not that they get depressed.


They don't use it. It atrophies like an arm that you don't pick anything up with it just gets limp. You ever break your arm know when you break your arm to put it in a cast one of the weird things as you get your arm out of the castle. It's a little like your arm atrophy Minds always like that. I always look like it had a broken arm for three years. I did break my leg. Once that was fucked up bro. No wrestling season got run over by a car. Yeah, what happened girlfriend at the time dropped me off after school, and I was getting my back. Check out of her trunk, but she forgot that I was behind her car getting a backpack out of her trunk started backing off impact over you on purpose and now you're justifying it and I almost made it out of the way.


It was the last second I do and then she hit it out of the way. Yeah, turn the wheel. Yeah cracked my leg into two pieces month before my senior year of wrestling started big singer. Yeah. What's up, Jamie? All right, turn this back to this chimpanzee story bone. It's got its a little bit crazier than you probably like you probably stop looking. Into this. Oh go crazy guy. He won a lawsuit against West Covina to keep the Chimp in the 60s because the judge said the chimp quote doesn't have the traits of a wild animal and was somewhat better behaved in some people it but it like so there is some I was reading more about this story I get is test excuse me according to reports. It is testicles also and there are some report that it ate part of his brain like they've cracked open a skull and got a piece of his brain.


This chimp was later put into Another holding Place escaped again and like 2005 or eight or something because this happened the original story happened. I don't know what 2002 Maybe the people who originally owned the chimp like rented a helicopter to go find it it was more lawsuit, but that but you say that the he ate his brain it wasn't that chimp that ate his brain wasn't his don't believe so but this chimp got involved with like it says that it's his champ that got involved that it like there was a police officer that got into like when it got out one time like got into an altercation with the cops. There's like 80% of cops. They suck at fighting drunks.


Yeah. Imagine finding a champ like you how many videos have you seen of? Trying to pull guy over in the guy wins of kicking their ass. Yeah that happens a lot. And as we required two hundred fifty thousand dollars in medical treatment for the policeman, Gloria Allred was defending the chimp and Court. Yeah, like I swear to God like it gets like oh my God, that's hilarious. If it the two chimps that bought it in the first time didn't have good enough lawyers. This is what this is like a lawyer website talking about it. Yeah, it is so crazy. The chimps have lawyers. How can I change have a lawyer dogs dogs? Don't get lawyers, right? So the dog bites you they just put the dog down but have a chimp bite you like hold on this him sound so good.


He almost represented himself in court. This guy lays scaping from prison eating brains. Try to bullshit. I don't think it's the same chimp that ate the brains. I think he's a chimp attack the garden tours dick off and ate his brains. They do take take your testicles off. They seem to know that that's where your comments toward. No good. That's not good. That's not cool. That is not cool. It's so crazy the well, you know one the one about the lady in Connecticut, right? No, no. No. This one's even freakier. This lady had a giant champ like a 200 pounder and it lived with her and slept in her bed. Oh, wow, and she gave it's an X and red wine. And one day this lady her friend came over cock-blocking and this chimp didn't like it.


So he tore apart. He tore a lady apart the same way that tour That Man Apart toward this lady apart or face apart. Horrible story terrifying story this lady thought this chimp was like a pet. And then she realized like this chimp as no idea what the rules are and you can't tell what to do because he was tired of this lady coming around and it wasn't the lady that was you know, red wine and knows another way is telling her to not give him red wine and not give him Xanax and he was like, this bitch is cock-block. You think the chimp looked for testicles and was like, what the fuck? No, I probably knew it was a female but I don't even know I'm joking around about the cock block. Part by the he whatever reason didn't like that lady and just decided to tear apart.


You just can't keep them as pets they're there to it's so strange. They're animals for sure. Have you ever there also, so close to human. Have you thought about getting any wild animals while index is now that you're in Texas funny you say that I have a couple drafts on order. I would have giraffes as I've had a bit of my ACT about what a giraffe's you know, About the only animals of the zoo the don't seem bummed out at all a giraffe's because they just like another day with no Lions his stroll around there. So happy they're so calm at the zoo that they let babies feed them. Like when my daughter was two or barter the zoo.


She holds out a piece of lettuce and the giraffe come over its giraffe didn't train it and his tongue reaches out and grabs a hold of laser the lettuce. It's really kind of cool the way they do it. Yeah, but that's the only animal that I would keep as a pet because they don't seem to care they seem to like it. Like this stress free. They just chill. I held a koala went in Australia this last time someone with the whole kill Tony Cruz. So like I'm like, okay, I'll do the touristy stuff that I've never done there in the seven or eight or whatever times I've been there and we went and hold koalas and they feed them eucalyptus the whole time. That's all they eat. And the reason why they keep feeding them eucalyptus is because the second you stop giving them eucalyptus like truly within 3 seconds of them not having the next Leaf they Turn more into a bear like it's like they start acting instead of being this mellow little bundle of joy, you feel their claws tighten up and they get you just you feel it.


It's a fucking bear. They're all anger, like cute and and slow and dumb and then as soon as they it's a straight-up drug, like it's an IV drip of just heroin to them and if they come off it just is there another animal like that that only eats one plant. I don't know. That's a good question. Right mean cows eat grass sheep eat grass. But they just eat eucalyptus. Yeah, like one weird plant. They smell like it Stroh. Oh, yeah. Wonder what they taste like, that's a good question. Let's do it again real country with you. Would you cook one? Yeah, would you felt like a little aggression from him? Right? Absolutely fucking leaves.


Yeah, where's my fucking leaves? Like a fake baby? Yeah, it's real time. Did you remember that story about a girl that is this couple adopted and they thought they were adopting like a ten-year-old and it turned out to be a tiny person. And a tiny person who's completely insane and was pretending to be a little kid. Oh, no that Story scary. No sir is a terrifying story because this couple had this like little tiny person that in their house that was like Chucky they wanted to kill them. I like and then they realize like oh this lady's 30 right here Ukrainian orphan the center of an adoption Scandal might be an adult here eight adults who are caught posing as children times.


Yeah. So look at that. Imagine that's a 30 year old playing with your baby and you like we're going to help her. She can have a better life. Meanwhile, she's doing heroin when you're not around. Yeah, that might be these are the different stories. These are the different stories Okay, click on that one parent. Well, I'll come on you fucking pop up. Oh you son of a bitch looks like you using an adblocker. We're going to cock-block your ad blocker. That's hilarious. Why don't you just shut off the ad blocker? I don't mind at all right parents who are cute parents were accused of abandoning an eight-year-old Ukrainian girl City adopted they adopted say she Actually a 22 year old mentally Disturbed adult.


Look at the parents like it's a movie. Is it calling Brothers movie right like those two winding up in jail. Well it all started when we try to do a good thing and adopted baby. Yeah, you know Darrell's balls didn't work so we decided Fuck crazy. That's frightening. Hold on a second scroll back up again. We just yeah Christine Barnett says Natalia terrorized her family and interview interview with the Daily Mail trusted Source Christine. Barnett said that the adoption was a scam. The girl was not who they thought. She was Christine Barnett said that she and her now ex-husband all they got divorced over this agreed to an emergency adoption of Florida in 2010.


She said she didn't know him many details about the tallies background, but we're told her Adopted parents gave her up for undisclosed reasons like maybe because she's 20 Christine. Brennan said the Italia Terrorizer family tried to stab them when they were sleeping and once tried to push her towards an electric fence and poured bleach in her coffee. There you go get rid of the coronavirus the media's painting me to be a child abuser, but there's no child he or she said Natalia was a woman she had period whoa shit adult teeth. She never grew a single image. What should it be what happened? Even with a child with dwarfism the doctors all confirmed.


She was suffering from a severe psychological illness only diagnosed in adults. That's scary. Natalya has a type of dwarfism called. Whoa. How about this word? Help me out spondee low-e pippi's officio. I said spawned all epiphyseal. Okay dysplasia, which meat makes her age difficult to actually Record without a birth certificate. Wow, though. She was said to be six when the Barnett's adopted her in 2010. NBC news said it's a hospital records showing her age as about 8 in June of 2010. Oh, well, that doesn't mean anything.


Okay citing court documents W is HTV in Indianapolis CW affiliate reported that the girls age was changed from 8 to 22 and 2012 instead of skeletal survey at the Peyton. Ting holla Peyton Manning has don't Children's Hospital Peyton Manning Children's Hospital deemed her to be 11 at the time. Wow. She was 22 with a 22 year old skeleton when she was 11. Wow, what she made a career perpetuating her age facade scroll back up. It's weird that they did the test at a children's hospital. Natalia was an adult the document has been verified but says that she made a career of perfect per pet you perpetuating.


It's weird word. How often you say that Professor we had to awaiting her age was I That very often. I read it a lot continue to fool those who have the best intentions. That's crazy. Where she now I mean being a kid is pretty awesome. You don't have to work you get free food. You're chilling stab people with sleeping. Yeah. They think you're a little kid. You just really came out. Did you hear adopt? Any you're old and you keep like all right. Let's check your height. And you do a little pencil mark on the door. You couldn't even make that movie because people say that you were being an ableist you can make That movie about 10 years ago, but if you try to make that movie today people call your piece of shit, like the Studio's wouldn't fund it.


They'd be scared of the backlash. It's so sad. What's going on? The little people did I saw some stat the other day about how they're doing remakes and like ya know original and taking stuff out of movies. I saw Poltergeist the other day. Hey, I almost went to the drive-in last week and saw that that was playing at a local driving. I haven't seen in forever. Yeah kinda I didn't remember so much of it. It's probably been 20 plus Since I saw it, but one thing I recognize when I saw was like the times were so different when that movie came out. I want to say that movies. It's like it's eight was like 84 some shit. Like when do you think that came out? I guess 82 you forgot the rest of the store.


She got adopted again and went on did more interviews and said that like she was 16 not 33 the girl on the thing you picture ever on the thing. Oh, that's oh my God. Oh my God. She looks like she's 40. That's her. Yeah, that's little girl. Totally looks like an adult The Tigress Barnett. I'm 16. Not a 33 year old scam artist. She's old look at her face. That's not true. Look at her face. Go back up to that face. That is not a sixteen-year-old face. That's a woman's face. Yeah, that's crazy. But look how small our hands are in relationship to rest of her face to if I adopted an eight-year-old and that's what showed up at my door at immediate immediate return but I think when she was 20, she pulled it off like you saw that other picture of her the other picture of her she looked young.


Yeah. She looked like a little kid, but she looked like a little, you know from 20 to 33. She does not look the same that's crazy that we had like even watched it or something like we heard her talk or did we I I remembered it was all like flashing back to die have theirs. I was a on my YouTube feed watching Filipino pouliot day and an old interview came up with us with someone. I didn't even remember was a guest like if you had said is this guy been a guest like no never heard of him. Maybe I sat down with a guy for three hours doing a podcast. Look my memories turn to dog shit. It's like there's too many too many people in there. There's too many. It's like overwhelmed.


I have no room of no hard drive space. Yeah, you gotta get rid of the old and new it's like when you find an old joke that ever happened to you. Oh, yeah, it's the best feeling crazy. It's like I wrote this in 1998. Yeah. Look at that like something in there. Like I was telling you Ron White storing a guest spot on the show. I'm doing tonight here in Austin and he's going back looking over his stuff. And today he was I was hanging with him. And at one point he goes, you know what this shit is pretty goddamn funny. That's wrong. Yeah. Well we talking about I talked Poltergeist Poltergeist. Oh, here's what the movie I think is what what years is 83 82.


Okay. So the movie is in the early 80s and apparently it was okay to be a piece of shit back then it was like super normal because like there's a scene where the sixteen-year-old daughter goes outside. There's just people doing construction in their backyard. And I mean like the windows right there. The parents are right there and these construction workers like you look at you in the guy's got like a like a tube and he's looking out through a to look at oil ugh paper towel tube. Looking at her like yeah. I love you. I love it. She's like fuck you and the wife. The mom is laughing that our daughter almost got raped. It is the craziest thing like look at this. Look at him. He's looking at like yeah look juice.


I love you. Yeah and look at this one. Hmm. She's like fuck you. She gave him the this fuck you. This is like the is the soft finger. That's a lot more motion. You have to use your arms, but the wife the mother why watch the mom react to it, but she's like yeah and they're laughing them watch when they go to the mom though. The mom since are they did give her the finger the moms like oh boys will be boys. However, we give that was today if you put that in a movie and try to pass it off like it was normal behavior. People would fucking freak out at you and it admitted You have to kill off those guys. What's even more interesting is that it's not just that's not establishing them as bad guys that get killed later on right those guys survived.


Oh, yeah, right. You never hear from even crazier. At least. If you did it, you'd have to fit in the storyline. Like oh these guys are going to be the first to get killed because they're bad people instead. They go in the whole family. It's the deal with a laughter that and those guys are going on about the day. They got paid for the construction. They did well later on in the movie The guy steals coffee that guy structure. Yeah steals food he reaches Has any grabs the like she's cooking spaghetti. So he dips his spoon the sauce taste the sauce reaches in through the window and she's like, how is it URLs are rules. Very good. No people were pieces of shit back. Then it was standard. It was like cute to watch like instead of getting outraged as an audience member, which would you most certainly would today?


That's one of those freaky movies? You've you learned about the history of that right? Well the daughter the little girl rather little girl. There's like a lot of things that happen. That's like a super cursed movie. Yeah. Yeah, so Dan, I wish I could remember all of them. But I remember her things very controversial. Like she was should have been taken to a hospital much sooner than she was like it was like it's a it was a sloppy sloppy ending. I can't remember all the things and get it confused with the Twilight Zone movie quite a bit to for cast members their fucking pop up. Shut up your fucking that was free for cast members died during And soon after the filming of the series The Series so there was more than how many of them were.


There was a I think at least three Carol and Freelancers. I like number two number two, I think was that the hotel right that crazy Hotel Carolyn's a little girl. So go back up to the top. Carol Anne freleng was the young point of the series played by Heather O'Rourke only 6 years old when the first Poltergeist film was released over or captivated audience student. She was misdiagnosed with crohn's disease in 1987 the following year O'Rourke fell ill again and their symptoms were casually attributed to the fluid day later. She collapsed and suffered a cardiac arrest after being airlifted to a children's hospital in San Diego O'Rourke died during the operation to correct a bowel obstruction.


It was later believe that She had been suffering from A congenital intestinal abnormality. So she had yeah, basically she was bleeding but that was the something she was born one of the inside. So here's another one Dominic Dune pretty the original older sister. That was the girl with a who gave up the finger equally tragic and unforeseen fate 82 Dune separated from her partner John Sweeney November of that year. He showed up at Dunes house pleading for her to take him back when she refused Sweeney grab do Dean's neck choked her until she was unconscious and left her to die. Fuck. He was sentenced to six and a half years in prison, but was released after three years and seven months.


She oh my God, if that was my daughter my God, I can imagine your daughter like three years is not that long. Okay, here we are in 2023 years ago 2016 and a half or not even because we're halfway in right more than half way inward towards the end summer summer of 2017. What and all sudden these guys out of choked your daughter today. I know chimps have been in prison more than that guy should be should put him in with the chimp. That's what they should do. Yeah, you took a woman to death. They put you in with a champ and they make you feed the other chimp the birthday cake. It's also interesting how they wrote that choked her until she was unconscious and then laughter did I know you mean killed her, right? Yeah. What the fuck are you talking about? Choked her to death choked her to death.


I wrote that. Yeah, probably inside of the guy that writes that the guy that wrote it. Anyway, I loved who died accidentally. Whoops. Yeah, maybe just The choking. Have you ever been with a girl that wants get choked? Yeah weird, right? Yeah. I'm not into it. Not into it. Yeah, I don't want to let that fuckin Genie out of the bottle. Mmm. Last thing you want to do is be really into the choking right? You know, it's like being really into feet. Yeah weird, but way worse because it could lead to death. Yeah, if you really into feet and then you did a normal girl and you're like, oh, you know like to with your feet just like what like for a lot of gals that would be a deal-breaker looking for a husband looking for a man to take care of your children with for person be responsible.


You don't want a guy wants to beat off on your feet. Right? So for a guy who's really in the feet and then it breaks up with his woman and tries to get a new one feet things kind of important, but that's but at least that's not dangerous is just creepy. Yeah, but for someone who's into choking people, he's got a real careful test those Waters. Yeah, you know like if you were the girl That's like you had a crazy relationship for ten years. Are you just fucking choke each other, you know damn that's what I miss. I miss choking and fucking Holdings fun grabbing fun grabbing by the throats fun. Applying pressure isn't fun.


It's not fun grabbing of it fun your been with a girl that you're hooking up and she says hit me. No, really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Whoa and I go it's stopped everything. What do you mean? What are you what do you mean then she goes slap me and I'm like, okay that's different. That's different than hit. Yeah, because hit and slapper two, very different things. Yeah, but they're still hitting right because the landings weird if you slap a woman and she calls the cops the cops. So you hit her as a salt Stockton slap. I think that's happening. Did you that in a fire spitting in someone's face is a salt. There's a there's this crazy video of this woman screaming in this cops face.


New York should I keep fucking fascist and he's just standing there taking and she spits in his face. He's like, oh okay time to rest you and he grabs her and she screamed what are you doing? Right doesn't spitting is a salt if you're gonna spit in someone's face you might as well kick them in the balls. Absolutely. That is the we are fighting. Yeah. It's a fight. Yeah you spit in someone's face is straight punches, you might as well have just gotten a sucker punch in. Yeah should have just thrown the punch. That's that's the it's the salt. Is there anything worse than that? Is there anything worse than spitting? In another humans face. Well, the only difference is you spit someone, you know, you're not going to kill them. But if you hit someone you really could kill them if you hit someone you knock them out and they fall and hit their head on the concrete. They could die that really can happen the so there's a day I don't think it's the same assault.


It's just it's fucking gross. It's mean it's definitely like you basically as close to starting a fight as you can without hitting a person but if you're going to have a scale of like murder down to spitting in the face like there's a difference. And what you're doing, you know, you're certainly provoking someone to extreme violence. If you spit in someone's face, you don't leave them a lot of options, especially they have a temper like most people you spit in their face. They're going to throw. Yeah, but if you hit someone and they fall and they die, it's not the same thing as spit in someone's face. Believe me. You're gonna go to jail for a long time. Unless you get the judge to give the guy three years for choking a girl with death in 1982, but it's like I'm telling you the world was a different place back then.


Like women are right. How about that? Like I know a lot of these feminists went crazy and some of them went way over the edge the point where they actually don't like men but they're right. If you watch watch movies like that and you see a woman who got choked to death in the guy only got three years and she was a movie star right? She was in Poltergeist and she got choked to death and I still only got three and a half years. crazy being a woman for most of History must have been fucking terrifying for most of history is still terrifying but for most of History like you hook up with a guy you got to really worry about this guy killing you it's probably not going to happen one out of a hundred times, but one out of a hundred is like Yeah, like who's that chick that died while hanging out with Christopher Walken and whoever huh?


Yeah, the girl that was murdered. I can have a drink diesel fuel Texas whiskey that what this says. Cheers. I don't know any California put some whiskey. Well, there's a bunch of those stories like Natalie Wood. Is that it? That's the one right she drowned on a boat Christopher Walken was there Robert Wagner would think was the one who people were pointing the finger at but Christopher Walken I think was like hanging out there like on the boat or something. I was there paying attention seems weird that here. I am on a boat seems like he would be a Natalie Wood's death Christopher Walken breaks his silence.


Oh, they were arguing. It's true. I watched him the Day in just I just watch the preview of that movie where he can see the future or hold people's hands was it called Dead Zone? Was that what is Stephen King book Things The Dead Zone. Yeah. I was wild he was so young baby-faced. And there was a guy in it who was played by Michael Sheen who is a going to be the president a crazy egomania president, and he wanted to detonate nukes want to start a nuclear war. Christopher Walken could see the future there. He is.


He died and came back to life when he came back to life. You can see the future when he touched your hand like he holds your hand and they can see what's going to happen to you. What a badass look at young Christopher Walken. Look at that fucking guy. Oh, he's great. He's out. He's been great forever him and Harvey Keitel. They don't get enough. Yeah enough love Christopher Walken's been so many great movies, man. What's that? Vampire moving? Scroll down. What? Is that? What is that? What the fuck? Is that movie 7 Sleepy Hollow Sleepy Hollow. Wow, no shit. I don't remember that at all. This too many movies Tim Burton. Just watched Beetlejuice for the first time in a while.


Oh classic. So good my family and I we watch Nightmare before Halloween or Nightmare Before Christmas. Watch that every year. It's great. It's fucking fantastic and it's incredible while watching Beetlejuice. I was thinking about what we were talking about earlier about how what executive would make that today not knowing that it's a hit never know like just like, okay, so there there's this couple that Eyes and I like okay. Well, at least we're not a likable couple right? No, super super likable couple they die within the first five minutes of the film and then they go back to their hair. There's a couple of ones that people want to buy the house after they die.


They take over the house basically creepy movie about real estate and them not listening to the leader of purgatory that tells them to do anything but say Beetlejuice three But they do. Exactly be like, what are you talking about? Get out of here. He told you so, okay pal great. Yeah, we'll let you know. You know what I watched again recently Coraline. Do you ever see that? I think that's Tim Burton as well 99% sure. It's amazing. It's really good. It's really creepy animated like so no, it's not who is it? So I'm Tim Burton.


Tim Burton's involved at all Chuck Snopes You know what else I watch the other day dear you we've been going back and forth about Snopes what Snopes what exactly watch Kingpin the other day. Oh, that's a great movie. Unbelievable. Oh fairly been probably their most underrated movie. Yeah. Oh, yeah for sure. It's so good and what I realized watching it this time that Bill Murray plays the bad guy. Oh, yeah and his crazy hair. Yeah. Secular here and he's a hilarious bad guy and Woody Harrelson plays the good guy and Woody Harrelson a great dramatic actor and Bill Murray's the silliest guy of all time and it just works perfectly.


It's an amazing movie and it's amazing movie about bowling. Yeah. Yeah Bill Murray's he's great as a bad guy. Who's a bad guy in Groundhog Day? Yeah, he's a bad guy that became a good guy by the end of the movie. He's a great golfer Bill Murray's here next to Donald Trump's hair, huh? Ha ha ha who were better? You should see Bill Murray. He's so funny man. He does. He's really silly out there. Like he I saw a video of them. He called over the guy with a microphone, you know, how you hear golf shots when they happen the guy that holds like that thing and he called him. Oh, he said come over here get closer. I want you to hear this fucking bomb.


I'm about to hit her something like that and the guy gets closer and he sets up again. He was close. You guys closer in the guy gets it right up on it. Does this big backswing he slams the hell out of this ball, man. It sounds it sounded like fucking heaven when he had it because the guys right on he had water right next to it. He can play. Oh I heard I heard he's like a pro. Yeah. Do you see it anywhere Tim Burton Coraline? He's nothing no came up that people are asking about like he didn't direct or produce it like wow came out the same time or similar time is the other thing. It looks like one of his movies. That's what's crazy eyes. Assumed he did it because it's so Tim Burton like, you know, it's but it's probably someone who's a fan does like similar weird observed strange.


I think he weren't anything that guy worked with Tim Burton. Here's the article says he stepped out of his shadow to make Coraline. Oh, there it is. Maybe it's like Protege, okay. Interesting Burton didn't producer direct it interest Diamond book just like nightmare for okay cool. Well, he nailed it with whoever that gentleman is. It's really good. It's just strange movie about these people that move into this house and it's all animated and this little girl finds this door that's been sealed off like this little tiny like like to foot doors the fuck is this but it's been covered wallpaper and she finds a key for it and she opens it up and it has a tunnel. It goes through it and find a version of her family.


That's way nicer than her family, but they have buttons for eyes. Like the mom is like doting like her parents are writers and all they're doing is like we have to work get out of here. I'm trying to work and they're like, they're not into hanging out with the kid and she's bored. It's rainy and shitty and then she goes through this weird tunnel and all the people over there are mirrors of her parents but much nicer though. All their into is her the care about is her and her wishes and they give you the most delicious food and there with her all the time, but they want her to have button eyes. They want her to stay there forever. And eventually she realized like something's really fucking wrong here and she's going back and forth between the two worlds.


It's really cool. So whenever you have kids Tony whenever you shoot a live one, it's the old lady. Yeah, and you know, you make a little baby kid little baby. Tony baby kid make them watch coral on okay. Say could be worse. You little fuck plug. This lady wants to sell buttons in your eyeballs. Sounds scary. It's a it's a cool movie and they get creepier and creepier as the movie goes on the parents get progressively weirder and creepier like these it's nice Slow Burn like they start off real sweet spoiler alert, and they keep getting weirder and weirder. Edward Scissorhands turns into a Christmas movie at the end doesn't yeah, I don't think I ever watch that.


It's a good one. Yeah. Sure. That's a fun one to watch. How many moves is Johnny Depp in in Jesus Christ. They booted him out of this new movie because he lost a lawsuit see that. Yeah crazy. You see the hear the recordings where she's admitting to hitting him. She's admitting to punching him. Yeah, I guess the judge is just insane on this case. Was a it was a civil suit right where he was suing a tabloid for describing him and inaccurate manner or describing his life doing it. And then he lost that suit and because he lost that suit wonder if it's like just the Optics of him losing that suit.


So the the studio has to step in and get rid of them. Right? So what it is, I think so. That's just what they do nowadays. They're like, okay you're not working. Not working. I think they still have to pay him. No, I think that's also part of the thing. He still gets an eight-figure paycheck. So we let such a neck. Yeah, and he gets to stay home beautiful. Yeah doesn't have to do the press releases doesn't have to walk the red carpet. He gets to just be Johnny Depp. I want a very nice if it just the the they he doesn't do the movie. But that money just pays her off. Get out. Yeah stop. Leave me alone. I don't think She gets any money anymore.


I think he's suing her now. I think that's what's happening. It is a badass Jeff Bezos. Got a divorce made his ex immediately the richest woman of all time. You don't immediately she became that 36 billion dollars the richest woman of all time want it all in a divorce and then right after that which was 2019 he goes and he doubles or triples his overall wealth, so he got out. Right before making her twice over the richest woman of all time. So she got 36 billion or whatever instead of 72, which she would have gotten a year later.


Once the pandemic hit probably pissing someone off that the way the richest women get to be. The richest woman is through divorce. Yeah. It's probably a lot of women right now. That just don't want fucking hear that. Yeah, like dumb. Can we just not mention that just stop it richest woman of all time trying to be over here chicken ass. Yeah. She did. By getting cheated on did she I think they're already broken up. Do you want a cigar? I know you do. She's number 22 on the list overall. As of September shut your mouth isn't stav richest people show you how to write. This is the richest 122 for women of all people right of all people. She's the richest woman though. Yeah, but she was in stock.


Why is put in here Jamie? I'm not no. I'm just saying she seems like y'all got some of that money to like, she's fun to be down on smokes. She got fuck. She did not get fucked it up. Oh, no sweet to me like 35 billion, right? Didn't she? Yeah. Yeah, but I'm saying like the point was that he got her out before the old stock went up like she just went up with what he knew Chuckles he knew what was coming. He probably did. Probably did its part. Yeah, he go 35 35 billion. Okay. Yes a nice smile on his face. I guess. I'm the world now. She's the most well, whatever now it's gone up in just a year. She gave a bunch of money to Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to like, I think I think some Billy's crazy gave a lot of money giving pledges what that's called.


What is the charitable giving campaign in which she willingly committed to give away almost Her most of her wealth to charity over her lifetime or in her will is he take that back? It's a non legally non-binding good change your mind though. That makes sense when they get older. Stop having periods start getting mean. Yeah develop some testosterone. That's one of the things that you see old ladies with mustaches. Yeah, they get testosterone. Really? Yeah, the body stops producing as much estrogen get a little more rugged so I should be able to fend for yourself. That's the amount of testosterone that I have. Naturally. I have the testosterone of an old lady hold angry lady with no periods.


Same mustache, by the way. I'm not a doctor don't know if that's true. But there I do know that women who fend for themselves and who run businesses and women who are like entrepreneurs and go-getters. They do statistically have higher levels of testosterone and they think there's a correlation between not just their actions, but that when they're in Forced into the role of the breadwinner and the fortunes is role of they actually developed naturally develop more testosterone than they would if they were in like a situation where they're mad. Jeff Bezos think you just chill right that makes sense totally makes sense.


People are adaptable. Yeah and like testosterone. I mean, of course they have to who's gonna have that type of go-getter go get it energy without it like that chick from man. Oh, the the the one that made tried to make the machine where it test your blood. Oh, I was gonna bring her up Elizabeth Thanos. Yeah, you know, that's a fake voice the deep voice. He had social fake diary. She faked the voice. I want to hear a real vote people caught her talking on the phone and they were like, well who was in your room and they walked in there and saw her and she like saw them. Hey, let me call you back.


Whoa. She pretended to be like a female Steve Jobs. She's like I know what to do. I'll just ask him. Man, I'll put on black turtlenecks and everybody celebrated her. Yeah, everybody's like you're amazing. You're amazing. They wanted a woman to be an entrepreneur so bad. She was the richest self-made woman ever. I think at one point in time. She was worth more than 9 billion dollars. And now nothing to it was all a lie. Yeah. It was certainly a lot of lies. I don't know if it was all a lie. I don't think it worked. I think they really exaggerated what it could do and they sold it. It like I think they sold to Walgreens. And the thing is it's not just as simple as they lied.


It's also that people got medical screenings with that device that weren't accurate. So like maybe you don't feel good. Maybe you have a history of cancer in your family and you're like, oh my God, I think I might have something and then you go to wherever and you get that theranos blood screening and they go no Mike you're fine. You like who back to boozing? Meanwhile, Mike's got colon cancer or Mike's got a tumor in his liver. Mike's got in you never find out because this Blood scanner thing is horseshit. How long did they put her away for they haven't put her away. She hasn't lost in court yet the I believe the company went bankrupt.


And then they owe so much money. Like I think Betsy DeVos, I think she's into them for some astounding amount of money. I think she she went in for I want to say it's more than 50 million dollars and a lot of other like really high profile people got sucked into the narrative, right? The narrative was here's this genius woman who's really like the female Steve Jobs and she even dressed like Steve Jobs and it sounded Rate, I remember here in the store. I'm like, wow, this chicks badass. I remember thinking like, oh, that's cool. I can get a blood test just by a finger prick way better because I get blood tests all the time.


I always want to find out where my body is and to kind of take so many vitamins and nutrients and testosterone replacement and all this shit and NAD. I want to find out how healthy I am throwing those homes May pursue mental disease in her defense. Yeah. I heard about that. Yeah, the she might say she's mentally ill which is why she lied I'd a lot but there's a really great podcast series about her the drop out. It's called the Dropout. It's excellent. I think it might be wondering find out if it's wonder--i find out who makes it but it's yeah, but it's the podcast series is amazing when I was living in California.


I listened to it like back to back to back till it was over like every week when the new episode would come out I get pumped. Lacey audio it says ABC audio whoever made it thumbs up. You guys killed it because it was so compelling like you find the story. There's a guy named Sonny who was her boyfriend drove the Lamborghinis, like real flashy guy and the two of them put the scam together, but he claimed did not know what she was doing and you watch the whole thing on HBO, right? I didn't know. Oh man. Yeah. I know all about Sonny you got to watch it man. They go to work together they and they did, you know, when they're new they were banging right? There were high. In it, which is kind of hot. Yeah total pretending. Oh, yeah.


I'm so tired of Sunny shit thinking about firing him right while she's Sonny's like I think Elizabeth lost her mind every day send it in rolling into work together hooking up at night borrowing a bunch of money for a product that was never going to work everything. We're doing coke or something because I think maybe when you see Decisions like that that you know, like there's no way he's going to work. What's Happening Here. I usually think someone's on some sort of speed and feta means Coke something something crazy very easily could have been yeah. See, you know all about this and you never watched the HBO documentary series.


No. Oh, it's absolutely incredible. I'm sure it's good. I got the whole story from the ABC podcast series pretty crazy though because you have to the machine is like it was just it was never going to work and every scientist to showing you it was never going to work and it shows you the needles and the glass vials just breaking this just a pool pools of blood in these dirty plastic. Machines that they had or I mean they had to get these orders out to Walgreens. And as you probably know they were training people at Walgreens with that. I'd know it cashiers that had no experience of the such how to because they ended up having to drop the blood of these people because they just kept lying to people they're like, oh this thing isn't working today.


You got the past for the Thana. What was it again? Thaw no Sarah no Sarah knows, but unfortunately today it's down. And so we're just going to take your blood with a syringe and they had to train these Walgreens Employees. Yes tapping a vein. Yes. Oh my God, that's crazy. And that's how they kept the con going on for even longer because once Walgreen's was behind it. They paid the money. They're like, ow, let's at least there's something fascinating about cons. Yeah, something fascinating super fascinating, you know, like I went to a boxing gym once in North Hollywood. Would in the boxing coach never forget this he's like you should invest in this thing.


I'm doing I'm like, what is it was a pyramid scheme he starts describing it to me. I was like, well you buy in and then when you get other people to join up then you cash out I go. I will you just you're talking about a pyramid scheme. Like he didn't know what a pyramid scheme is. He's like dude. I've been making some money off of this I go. Do you know what a pyramid scheme is? He goes? No, I go. What you described is a pyramid scheme. There's no Google back. Then when I was like God damn it, and I'm like I got to stop coming here like because the guy wouldn't stop talking to me about this. Really I'm telling you should invest in this because it's a great deal. I'm getting money back. I'm putting money in you get a bunch of people to join in like a where's the money going? Well, they're investing and what And what it was like he was just he didn't understand like it's like it's like the biggest pyramid scheme ever.


The biggest Ponzi scheme is Bernie Madoff, which is super super super sophisticated. He got Steven Spielberg. Really? Oh, yeah. He got some sophisticated people the guy made Poltergeist also got taken seat find out all the people that got like famous people who got taken by Bernie Madoff. It's a big list. Yeah because he was he was bringing back real returns. Like real return so you get you know, a certain percentage every year like you is just nailing it and there's a lot of financial people are like, what is this? What are you doing? Like what this is this doesn't add up. What's Happening Here. What are the odds that his fucking last name was Madoff.


Is that the weirdest? It's like OJ's last name being cold-blooded murder. It's insane made off with a bunch of money or or wiener. Right. That's another perfect. One guy always to show his dick. Yeah this guys, it's Andrew wiener. So what is it was funny? Anthony Weiner? Yeah. Where is he? He's out of jail, right? You should be doing stand-up. That's a good idea guys a comic Steven Spielberg the directors charity the Wonder Kinder Foundation lost an undisclosed amount in November 2006. It had assets of twelve point six million 70% of its interest in and dividend income reportedly came from Madoff.


Wow, Kevin Bacon. They got taken and and Kyra Sedgwick. She got taken Norman Brandman. However, Ira rennert look at him. He should be taken. I don't trust your time. I like to call you a shirt. If I got here Zsa Zsa Gabor goddamn. They took Zhao you piece of shit. She suffered a 10 million dollar loss. Oh, no. She's from Green Acres broke goodness. They got the Holocaust Survivor to Sandy Koufax. Who else? Oh my God Malkovich you son of a bitch. They should kill him for that. It says most of them have recovered.


Oh shut up, you know it recovered finally receiving Padgett and not recovered everything just finally getting my starting to get money back. But this is 27 4 billion of recovered funds. I want another look at his face. They one of the things they said that was really fascinating about him the cops that that handled him and all the people that brought him to court like he never felt any remorse never he was a straight-up sociopath. He didn't give a fuck. He kept demanding things. He felt he should get more thing. Sleep better treatment want to better rooms No Remorse never felt bad that he all these retirees these people that do the save their whole life and they were gonna put all their money in his account. Oh Norman, I think we're going to get a good return on our money and just fuck you.


You stole it stole do I steal that much money was that was his what his business was. So what's the difference between 4 billion and 1 billion? Unless you're three billion you fucking idiot Christ when I am giving you You math advice you got a real problem. What can you buy with for that? You can't buy with one. But it does anyone do that. Yeah, no one wants their own Island. You're so naive. Listen to me. It's like everything you're playing a game. Okay, let's say playing golf right and you get you what's a good handicap 0 0 okay and say, what are you at right now?


Horrible, I don't know whatever will say I'm gonna start shitty. Whatever you are. You better than me. Yeah. What are you I'm not sure my exact handicap 30. Sure. Okay. You want to be 15. Don't you write then? You want to be 5. Yeah. Okay. Well when you're Elon Musk and you're worth 20 billion or whatever you look at Jeff Bezos like that piece of shit stealing my ideas as fucking Project Blue or whatever that bullshit rocket formula thing. He's got lying about his achievements. I want to beat them right when you Jeff Bezos and you realize like you're worth a hundred fifty billion, but you realize some Saudi oil guys are probably worth a couple trillion won be nice be the first legit trillionaire from the Western World and then you just like why wouldn't Bezos quit.


Why isn't he stopped working? Why is he just line a beach somewhere get his balls massage drink coconut juice. Why why do people keep working the keep working because it's a sickness because numbers you get numbers you want more numbers is one thing if Numbers doing what you love to do, like if you're a baseball player, and they keep paying you more and you love baseball, but if you're just a straight up numbers, man, you never fucking satisfied. You want more numbers. What is it? Bernie Madoff asking Trump to reduce his prison sentence for massive Ponzi scheme. What year is this last year? I hope he does. I hope he does just for the spectacle at all. I hope he pardoned Snowden and I hope he pardons Julian Assange.


Let's Madoff. Without his OJ Simpson a full pardon. What else? Yeah zhanna rates, Mike Tyson just goes down the list of everyone who ever went to jail for how many partners do you get as many? Oh, yeah my God. What if he just opens up the prison's everyone? Pardon? He might have loves you. You can all vote what if he changes that opens up. The prison's makes everyone pardon for every crime ever. And then you can all vote everything except murder and rape that'd be an everybody's thing storyline. Like if you know, he's going to push back on this thing. I don't know what's going to happen, but it'd be an interesting that'd be an interesting movie a president who's mad that he didn't get reelected.


So he lets out his anger on the country and just uses all of his power. Well you already fired was the Secretary of State know the secretary defense. Yeah. He fired the Secretary of Defense. I mean when you're firing people two months in and there was a Maybe it was New York Times articles reading about his schedule the there were saying he shows little interest in his job right now. Yeah, but what do you expect he just lost the election. Do you expect a guy that played golf more than any other president ever in the history of presidents who complained about Obama playing golf who's playing golf more than anybody ever when he tells the jobs over he's not going to make it.


He's not gonna keep working. Why would he do that? Yeah. Why would he keep working plus you don't you don't believe in the people that You don't believe your why help the people that went against you. Well, not everybody wins, right? I agree. I mean, look, I'm I've always been weirdly. I sort of like the guy. Well, you like bad guys. Yeah, but I don't think I like bad guys that are actually good guys, but our bad guys, you know what I mean? If you watch Cobra kai, no you should watch it. That's the whole theme of the movie really show the series. Yeah. Remember the bad guy that grabbed Macchio fucked up. He's You root for in the Cobra Kai series.


Wow, it's really good. It's really good. It's really cheesy in a good way. It's like watching a really well-written 1980s movie, but it goes on for hours and hours and hours. It's like a Netflix 1980s movie with 2020 writing but like an old Maj to 1980s movies and Ralph Macchio. What is what's Ralph Macchio doing this He's the bad guy, but he's also a good guy. He's a good guy, but he's making some really fucking Petty decisions and he kind of rude against him and the bad guys kind of a fucking loser, but you kind of root for him. Yeah, Ralph Macchio's a winner got car agency doing real. Well, yeah Larusso Larusso Auto Sales fucking great.


You know when Trump was at Madison Square Garden, I just didn't get the I just didn't The vibe from him that he was a bad guy. Oh, well, that's good enough. It's a different time Psalm from a distance seems Jesus Christ out your the average American voter. Hey, 70 million people can't be wrong. Of course. They can that's it. Yeah Johnny Lawrence. What is his real name is really good though the actor. I'm I don't know what he's done. Since Cobra Kai, I hope he's had like regular jobs. I haven't seen him in anything.


No, no far into this. Did you I'm always surprised by the things you end up watching. And now this is a Bill Burr suggestion Bill Burr see Justin Williams, Ibaka. Yeah, that's it. I knew it was as easy as I'm concerned. He's really good. He's really good in it. He I knew a lot of those karate douches when I was a kid. I knew a lot of those guys those Never Surrender right? No retreat Never Surrender. And then you just kick them in their chest and they surrender immediately. Well, they weren't the best schools like my school. I was really lucky. I found this the school when I was 15 years old.


I had a place that I went to before that in Newton. It was Joe Esposito's karate school and he was like a Newton Legend. He was a karate guy was it was a good school, but I didn't have the method to get. I did it was too hard to get there. I'll get my parents give me rides and they couldn't do it in time because when by the time they got off work the class very started. There was no like public transportation when I was 14 if you get me there, so I didn't go that often. But then the T which is the Massachusetts of Boston train system dropped me off like two blocks away from the Jae hun Kim Taekwondo Institute, and I found it when I was 15.


I got super super lucky because they were the most hardcore and this is in 1980. Yeah, they were it was just different is I guess I was 15. So was 81 ish 81-82. It was there were hardcore man, but there weren't like no no retreat. No surrender. It wasn't there was none of that shit was yes, sir. No, sir, Bonner bowing, you know, it was like you had the tenants of Taekwondo that you had to follow there was there was no Shenanigans or fuckery but there was no tough-guy shit either there was it was the likes very stoic. You know, it was it was but I will go to tournaments and you would see those no retreat.


No surrender. You see those guys and they weren't good that was part of the problems. They were trying to make up for the lack of skill in the lab is it's all about lineage man. It's all about who's teaching you like whether or not you learn your techniques correctly? Because if you go to a bad school one of the things that I found out when I was teaching is it's really hard to unlearn shit when I would teach people Things like if they had a background in like a martial art that in the 70s and 80s, there was no YouTube, right? So like you had to find a good instructor and you didn't know who the good instructors were some guys had bad technique, but they were just bad asses and they figured out how to win with bad technique, but then they would go up against someone who's also a badass with better technique and then you would see the difference like the the really good guys the tough guys that didn't have the right technique.


They would eventually fall off. Off and it was really hard for them to relearn stuff. So when I would teach people would be real hard to relearn stuff like the best students were people that knew nothing the best Tunes were girls because they didn't have any Macho bullshit like one of my best students was a girl that I train from the time she was 15. So she was like 18. I was so proud of her I would take her to karate tournaments these Taekwondo tournaments and she would do well was like this crazy weird Mentor relationship. I haven't this girl. She was she Listen to everything she never thought she knew more than you. So I'd have like 50 people in my class. But this one girl just would show up every day. Our parents would bring her and he would encourage her.


It was really cool. The girls wouldn't they wouldn't fight you on things like guys, I would teach them like you got to pick your knee up the rules. Sometimes when you guys close I like to do it like this like, okay, right. Listen to me. You got to pick your knee up. Yeah. Do you want to you want to kick like that guy? You want to kick like John Lee, you gotta pick your knee up you have to do it. Right guys would have like this weird. Ego shit girls wouldn't have it. I would say you have to pick me up to go like this and be like, yes, and then turn like that and they would just do it and if you learn the right way you had a way better path if you learn so I got stupid lucky then I walked into the right school and found these people that were like hardcore with technique everything had to be done correctly. And if you were off at all, we called every instructor was misters.


Mr. O'Malley or mr. Kim. Mr. O'Malley. Mr. Kim they were correct to not like that like this. Matter how hard you were hitting the back if your knee was low or if you need was everything your position was wrong. Your foot wasn't pivoted. They would correct you techniques everything, you know that from wrestling right hundred percent everything and golf. Yeah, everything everything. He does me anymore on that would take a golf club and go I'm gonna hit this ball so hard without ya doing the 30 things at once that you have to do. Well fall over and look like a complete moron. That's why it's so good to learn new things because when you learn new things and you start from scratch you get to be a beginner again. Yeah, and one of the things that I think plagues a lot of people is they never become beginners again at things and so you get proficient at something and then you become stagnant like whatever it is, whether it's martial arts or whether it's even pool.


I would remember when I would play in tournaments a lot. There was guys that never got better like they were where I was when I first started and then I got way better and they were the same same with martial arts is some people they do. I think for a long time but they never do it. Right those have like this weird flaws and their style or their execution of the technique but I think getting good at anything whether it's chess or golf or playing a musical instrument. I think that's one of the most important things a person can do is learn something from scratch what you suck at it and I'm trying to think of the next thing because I'm I'm not great at archery, but I'm pretty good. I'm pretty good. I'm pretty proficient.


I know how to keep my shit. It together when it comes to like the Moment of Truth when I like in a bow hunting scenario because I've been nervous a lot doing stand-up and fighting and all the other shit I've ever done but I need something new. I'm trying to figure out what it should be but I think guns like learning how to shoot pistols correctly like that Tarrant tactical that helped a lot. That was an interesting thing to do to get better at that because you realize that this is a totally different thing than anything else you do. And so you in learning from all the people there like how to hold it. He grabbed it really hard with your right hand but your left hand or your left hand rather, but your right hand you don't really grab that heart which is interesting is that's the trigger finger, but you don't have a lot of tension in that the tension is more in your left hand and all these techniques you learned from those like people that win these World Championships and shooting anything you're doing man, whatever whatever it is, whether it's yoga or what any just try some new right and get better at it.


Yeah. I play golf with one guy who wants to be Good, so he's not getting any better because he's like cheating. You know what I mean? So it's yeah, so and we all know that he cheats but he doesn't know that we all know and that we're watching him the whole time. So it's one of the funniest running things three out of the four of us know that the one is cheating continuously. So we'll do this thing where we're he'll go he'll find his ball if he finds his ball, by the way, which if he can't find his ball. He'll just say that he found his ball and drop drop another ball with a hill. He'll pull his cart over and then go to the other side of his cart so that we're all blocked out and will magically find his ball.


But if he doesn't go off with Donald Trump, no, because that's what he does. That's what everybody says. Now. These people are full of crap. You watch Tiger Woods. He'll tell you he's one of the best golfers that he's ever golfed with no to I want to go tomorrow Lagos. Ha ha I live in Florida. I want to go tomorrow Lago. I don't have you been they don't want to show Barbara. No, that's why they don't show you clips of trump play. In golf because they don't want people to know how good he is. I'm dead serious something. I will not listen to me stupid. Yeah, don't you think Trump would have videos of him being awesome at golf he does. Yeah, there's that's out there. Let's watch them. Okay, do you think you have videos of trump? Like you have videos of Manny Pacquiao?


Rundown pool? I told you Manny Pacquiao's like legit Pro you saw it. I think there's this videos of trump playing like Manny Pacquiao, please pool Trump probably doesn't release the videos because he thinks people will compare him to pro golfer. But to a non pro golfer, he's a freak listen to me bitch. I'm telling you. I'm right about the talking nonsense how and why President Trump treats it call even when he's playing is Tiger Woods. Yeah fake news. Yeah goal.com car. You can go to the New York Times and they'll tell you Trump is bad at somehow if anybody's conservative its golf players. So you think Tiger Woods how many conservative golf players do you think there are is it a thousand percent?


Trombones like 10 of the best courses, I understand but people that play golf or generally business oriented folks business oriented folks want better tax breaks. They're the kind of people that are going to be conservative. Yeah, so they're going to buy Golf Magazine people who write about golf maybe a little bit more liberal because they're journalists. Yeah. Exactly. Every journalist is a liberal not everyone. I mean those are couple but nobody's drinking what's up conservative newspaper Trump doesn't You cheat at golf He Cheats like a three card Monte dealer. He throws it boots. It moves it. He lies about his lies, he fudges and fools and flops at Winged Foot where Trump is a member the caddies get so got so used to seeing him kick his ball back onto the Fairway.


They came up with the nickname for it Pele. That's a nickname for him Pele. Get out of here. I play with him once says Brian Marshall a long time Wingfoot member and the chair of the Coming 2020s men's US Open, I would say that's a legit source his quote. It was a Saturday morning game. I got to the First Tee and he couldn't have been nicer. But then he said you see those two guys. They cheat see me I cheat and I expect you to cheat because we're going to beat those two guys today being funny. So yes, it's true. He's going to cheat you but I think Donald in his heart of hearts believes that you're going to cheat.


Beat him too. So if it's the same if everybody's cheating, he doesn't see it as really cheating. Okay, but that makes sense because I would think that a lot of his friends are dirtbags to like one of the things about joke thieves, right? We all know this they take kids on the road with them and those kids become joke these right last name names. Yeah, but we know we know Comics who started out working for thieves. Yeah, and those comments became thieves. No doubt. Yeah because they realize this guy's got a Mercedes. Yeah. Those are nice house. Yep, and that's how it's done. That's how it's done. Right you real you if you grow up in the wrong environment you really you think that that's the way to do it, you know, and I think if you're in that fucking dog eat dog, crazy egomaniac pre-internet business World, which Trenton 74 right?


It was 50 when the internet came around stop and think about that, right? Yeah, they weren't expecting that. Come on son. So you just keep being a big douche bag speaking of Cons I saved a I saved a I stopped one the other day. I felt really calm. Yeah, I felt really good about it. So I was leaving my place going to get a coffee and I see this guy leaning out of his like brown Bronco yelling at this lady in the car in the lane next to him. He don't go. Yes, something like that. I'll good. Nice one. No like it what you like a bead oj1. Yeah the out like an old beat-up oj1 and it's like beat up and brown and something just didn't look right about it.


And the guys like yelling like no seriously pull over lady bob up about right and I noticed that none like that something seems shady what's going on over there and then they're light turns green and he's like beeping at this lady aggressively that's in the lane next to him. Whatever I go get my coffee ten minutes later. I pull into a gas station to get something and I see the same car and this guy there's a lady pulled over at the gas station. He's yelling at this lady and the ladies like trying to like listen, but I'm not and again, I'm like screw it. I'm going to mind my own business and I go in the gas station and then she is in line behind me. She's going to the ATM and I'm like, hey, just out of curiosity.


What what what that guy say to you she goes, I think I'm being scammed I go you are it turns out that this guy was screaming at ladies that because of how they were driving. He had to swerve and hit a car and he doesn't want to have to go through the insurance to just give them a few hundred bucks now. Now since I saw him do it two different ladies at two different cross streets, I caught on to it and he was just about to get her. She was literally at the ATM putting her card in when I say what's that guy talking with you about and she knew it in her gut she was right. She was scared though. She's just gonna do it. Right and that's how they that's how they that's how they get you a lot of those men.


That's weird about Ela. You don't see love those three card Monte things. Have you ever seen three-card? Montana and is that what the cam York? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah or cards three-card Monte is with cards, but the cup thing is a similar kind of scam is like a little ball into the top of the move the cups around. This is like sleight of hand when you see David Blaine manipulate cards, you realize like oh, okay, like there's levels to everything like David Blaine can do crazy shit with cards like you did shit with my daughter like eat like did these card tricks and I was Watching everything he did and I have no idea how he did it. Like he did things were like cards would he have a stack of cars and he keep tapping the stack and the stack would go smaller and smaller to those like two cards.


You have no idea how he did it. He just looking at him like what are you doing? Like it's like he's got access to time travel. He's like pulling those cards out when you're not looking and then coming back to normal tonight. Like it didn't make right. I know how to do a couple minimal card tricks and I'm not very good at them. But like I have an idea of prove it. He was freaking mean I was watching him do when I swear. I was like I might catch him right now. I'm not fucking catch him. I was two feet from him and he did something. I don't even it just disappeared. How about the ones we did were the guys were holding his wrist. We had our security guys hold each of his he asked them to do it hold each of his wrist. He rolled his sleeves up and he made these cards disappear, you know, like what is happening?


Oh my God. What are you doing? What are you doing more than just it's like psychology and like Yeah misdirection. Yep. He's mixed it all together at a level that we can understand. He's so Advanced. Yeah, I took one writing gig like six or seven years ago with Justin Willman. Who's a genius great magician. He puts he's the Netflix guy now and I took the job because Robert Morton who used to be the executive producer of Letterman was the EP of this. Anyway, I take the job just because it's a short to for week were. Making a pilot for this magician. I'm like, I like magic magic school and Morty's the EP.


So this will be a cool thing to work on right short job. So I show up day one and basically we're all in a big writers room or whatever and I go yeah, you know I'll and they're like we got Tony here because he's a you know, he's going to add some Edge to the comedy on this show because it was a comedy it was comedy Central's first ever magic comedy show the pilot and and I go yeah, you know punch up whatever. You guys show me the tricks that you want to do and I'll write jokes around the trick and that's when I this is when I realized how cool this job was about to be they go the main guy goes now you write the trick and you write the jokes and I'm like, so you'll be able to do whatever my imagination thinks would be a cool magic trick and like him and like four other magicians, which was basically the rest of the creative staff at the same time.


We're like, yep and That's what excites them is. Because they can't even think of things. You know what I mean, they can but they want to hear what a different mind thinks would be impossible and then they figure out how to do it bigger. What was an example. Well, we ended up because it was a pilot of a show we ended up having to figure out a theme for just the pilot. So the for example the that was technology. So one of the things was him versus him versus a 3D printer. In making things appeared it was really funny because there was this kid they went to this we ended up finding this like nerdy smart school where this kid was excited about his 3D printer and basically it was it was just him making things appear out of absolutely nowhere.


Well one kid was still printing one thing with a 3D printer took forever and he ended up just pigeon pigeon pigeon pigeon car car car car card like it in. It up being you know, it's a comedy so but I'm trying to think of what other ones there were some really crazy ones. I think it's a whole world where there's there's things that they understand they know where the average person like you look at a deck of cards you have an idea of what's possible with with that deck of cards, but they have just 10 x times more options how to hold them how to move them how to maneuver those cards To distract you with the other hand.


Yeah, I mean, I'd like to hang around with David Blaine for a few months. Yeah and watch him do tricks. It ended up being one of the most fun gigs I ever worked on there was just I get home after a day of work and I'd find like the 7 of Spades in my shoe. Let this guy forgot to finish that one just he stuffed a folded card under Jeff's watch band. Wow, and he's like, where's the card and he just like where to go. You look at your wrist. He's like, huh? Hey like real Lies like it was folded and stuffed under his watch pan and he has a fucking G-Shock, right? So it's it's not like a loose crazy watch band. It's a tight Buckle rubber strap watch band.


He stuffs it in there and he's like what the fuck and I'm like what the fuck? No one saw it and that Jamie what you were filming some of it right? Did you film some of it other people did that? So I was wondering I was a big I was a big fan of his growing up because I was like a Each fan of magic David Copperfield But like after I figured out all the fake that was moved in the street magic because it's a little harder to do, you know, and that's what he was big on. So wait my whole life watching up close and he's got to be two feet from like I said, and I wanted to just I wanted to try to catch him and he was so good at he did like seven chicks in front of me King. He's a really nice guy really nice guy like genuinely nice on-camera off-camera with everybody with security guys with my family with everybody like you could tell it's just really nice friendly genuine guy, but some of the stuff he does is fucking weird like you maybe shove an ice pick through his bicep.


Yeah. What was that? Like, I mean, are you what here's the thing? Yeah. Um, it's not a trick right? It's just pain and I think pain is just a sensation. Right and if you could just tolerate the sensation it's not deadly and one time I hit a nerve when we had to back it out and do it again to do it a second time because I got in there used to stop stop stop like it hit the nerve side of back out and do it again, I think. It was supposed to be more disturbing and impressive than I reacted to it because first of all I'm used to pain, you know, I've been doing martial arts most about some always hurt.


I've had a bunch of surgeries. And also I've butchered animals like I understand muscle tissue and I'm not it's just like why are we doing this? It was more why we doing this then? Oh my God, I can't believe we're doing this like That one was not a good one for me because it's like okay like I could do that too. Like if you want to shove that through my arm, I could just sit here while you shove that through my arm. I wouldn't like it though. Did he bleed they bled a little bit? Yeah, we have to stop Andre film because he had like a little bit of a hematoma right? Jamie wasn't it? Look a little building up. Yeah. Yeah. And so the security guys how to put like a fucking bandaid on it shit.


Check it out some one of them is a medic. How do you think he'd do you think he went? Through the muscle I pushed it through his fucking arm dude, like his muscle a hundred percent not between the bone and the muscle. No. No, I shoved it through his muscle 100% but you can do that. Kick. Was it the needle it was an ice pick? I'm telling you you can do that. You know, there's guys this is one of the things we found out during the show that I don't know. There's guys that use that would shove swords through their body. Their whole gig was shoving swords through their body and we watched it live. We I mean not live we watch videos of these guys shoving swords through this one guy's body who's famous for it.


So it take like a long thin sword. They shove it through his chest and come out the other end and he'd just be standing there with his Throw yeah, so here's me. Did you see this now? So here's me shoving what the Yeah. I he's like show me how to do it. But here yeah, just shove it through. Yeah. Yeah poked it right through a 100% real but again, That's not the best one for me. Because if you're a person who's like doesn't necessarily see a lot of pain or you haven't you still like surgery or someone getting but like if you did that to a doctor, right the doctor be like, okay, I see what you're doing is pushing some through the muscle and probably hurts, right?


It's not a good joke or a trick. It's not it's not an illusion. He just doing something that hurts like okay, like Steve-O could do that. Steve has probably done that a hundred times. He does things like that. Yeah, you know what the creek then you go to clown college or something like that. I think but Steve-O climbed in a fucking treat headlines come chasing after him. Yeah, like he's he's the best he does a lot of shit that hurt frog thing too, though. That's like another that was a different thing. He swallowed a frog he swallowed a shitload of water. So during the podcast he probably He drank the kids. Yeah 15. He probably drank 15 bottles of water or something crazy and then he swallowed this frog and the Frog is in his stomach with all the water that he swallowed and then he spit up the water slowly but surely in a buck.


We had an ice bucket on the table and then he eventually got to the point where he felt the Frog coming up. They spit the frog out in my hand. Okay, good. Yeah, I mean he knows how to do it. Ma'am, that was the difference between David Blaine and Steve-O. Steve-O heats the Frog you're watching it. Come out of a different hole frog comes out of my nose your gums put up with the plunger to my butthole that stuff holds up man. Those movies. Nothing makes me laugh like those movies. I swear to God gasps. Yep. Nothing crazy there so I could watch it over and over and over again. What's amazing is a Steve-O walks around like he's fine.


It isn't seen that hurt. I mean one time real recently. Bunch of skin grafts remember got real badly burnt. Yeah, one of the things you know, yeah because you put together this new special. I actually he had me come over to to watch it and I'm telling you it is so freaking good. He's saved a lot of his favorite things that he wrote himself for this. Did you ever see the one where Tim Kennedy choked him unconscious on stage is that this one this new thing? No, this one's a while ago, but my friend Tim Kennedy who was top A notch middleweight in the UFC put the fucking choke to him choked him completely unconscious and let him go and he falls bounces his head off the ground.


It's like, oh this most recent one on this is what he taped himself by so funny this that he does my favorite thing I've ever seen on this one where he pretends like, he's a bicyclist, you know bicyclist where those goofy outfits. Look at this. Yeah his dick. Yeah, so he just painted up himself like he's meanwhile Hanging out and all these people he always falls next to somebody and in there just about to help them and they see that it is really can balls are just painted black doesn't really have a bike. Look at this. Oh my God, Johnny Knoxville just kicked him right in the balls and dick. Hmm that's pieces of his skin.


Oh Jesus Christ. Yeah. Yeah giant boils at one point. I think he does a shot of it does a shot glass of one of his infected burn. Has yeah, that's not good very funny though. So we're way to make a living though, right because after a while I realize you know, you're going to go Houdini eventually. Someone's gonna hit you with something you're going to die. Something's going to go wrong, but maybe not because he's been doing it. How old is Steve-O 45 probably yeah forty-five forty-six 46 but doing a long-ass time. Yeah, Ricky, I think he was going to let Chuck Liddell pungent.


That's not a good idea. I think that was one of the things he was doing something's gonna happen. Johnny. Knoxville got knocked out by Butterbean. Oh, yeah, it was an enormous man. Yeah, and he let him knock him out and get a boxing match of butter bean which is means you gotta let Butterbean knockout, right? You're not gonna win probably gave butter being a little bit of a thicker boxing glove on that one. Right? No. No, no. No, it's a regular glove. Look a nice regular 10 ounce gloves. of sentiment to the DMT dimension It's regular glove, right? I don't think it's even a sparring gloves. I don't think it's a 16 ounce or an 18-ounce glove.


I think it's a legit 10-ounce heavyweight boxing glove Butterbean. Who is this jackass? What's that sir? Early days of Jackass in there like just doing all sorts of seven MTV still languages their movies. Well, this is different. He fought him in a ring to this is in fighting him in a store. He hits his head on a display. I think like he beats the shit out of them. That's legit. He just beat him down and this lady's like what in the fuck look at these people like but this is legit like he's not like faking it. So this means that Johnny Knoxville got knocked out by Butterbean more than once because those are actually those look like 16-ounce gloves on be honest. Those are bad gloves that Johnny has on because they have Velcro on them.


He's letting him hit him. He let him have a couple but Johnny does not a punch. That's not fair. And then he kills them yikes terrible. But there was also one maybe the Steve-O someone boxed him in a ring. See if it's you know, you might be thinking about you might be thinking about the Tough Enough pro wrestling tournament. They did. No I'm thinking about a for short jackass where someone boxed Butterbean in a ring was an actual ring. I think that was all they did was they might have been something else. I'm pretty sure someone box him in a ring. See that's why it's a WrestleMania. Yeah, but it's not that see ya Butterbean Kayo's text Butterbean KO Steve-O from Jackass and butter.


But yeah, but yeah, but it's take off jackass. Just Butterbean knocks out Steve-O. Yes, one of the guys fought it was so is it only in the stat? What's that one? That would keep going. Now the one right below erekat. Yeah that one right there. That's it. No, no, right right below that sorry, man. We just watched is that the same thing? It's all Johnny Knoxville. And this is one in a ring. Maybe it's like a false memory. Okay. So the WWE once did this thing I had a horrible idea to famously one of the worst ideas ever. I think it was called the Tough Enough tournament and Vince's big idea because UFC was just gaining popularity was to have he took like 16 of his least favorite pro wrestlers that were like unlike cutting, you know, unlike the but he's quickly could be fired and he decided to make this tournament called the Tough Enough tournament and what he didn't realize Isis that some people were just better Fighters than others and the guy that ended up winning it all he didn't expect to win it.


So then he put him up against Butterbean at WrestleMania and Butterbean absolutely demolishes him. Oh, yeah, here it is. It's really sad. So famously, they hype this guy up. The right hand is wide open are you hello is left hand is so crazy. Yeah, that's so crazy. You can't you can't do that and he's going to get up because he's tough. Yep. They ruin this guy's career because now he's been beaten by a boxer and a pro wrestling ring. So it was over. Well, not only that he got beaten like legitimately that last one isn't good.


Yeah. Yeah. They dust him off. Look, he's still got his left hand low. Oh my God, that is so bad that so bad. That's such a bad. KOCO back to that again. So that guy that fights over look. Oh my God, that's horrendous. That's horrendous. Yeah, that's bad. I've gotta get this false memory of Butterbean fighting Johnny Knoxville in a ring yet. I'm doing a few things like just kidding. I was looking for any other celebrity or something I did maybe but maybe it's not Steve-O tail by Butterbean.


Hmm either way, but I being was a fucking tank of a human. He was a weird guy cause he was like the king of the three rounders or is it five rounders what it would they make them fight, but It didn't really have the endurance to go 12. So he would go short distances, but he was so big butter bean vs. Conor McGregor who wins Butterbean three rounds Butterbean Connor gets to go crazy butterbeans and of the for routers they call them. Yeah Butterbean Duty hit some once it's a weird number to land on right? That means he's really tired by round 5. He's so big you're not going to KO him his he doesn't have a neck is head starts at the top is next starts here. So it goes let's go straight out. He's not like A lot of getting kayode as you get twisted right your head washes around your brain washed around inside your head dude had a crazy dream.


And now I'm remembering it that a friend of mine was telling me that he's got an opening between his skull and his brain. He has to close I was like, what are you talking about? And he like lifted his skull up and I was like looking into his brain and it was all the space that was like his brain and then all this the space and then the skull and the outside and I was like, whoa, you got to get that fixed. Oh, what a crazy dream. That is freaky. I had one the other day sort of reminds me of that where one of my one of the guys that works at. The comedy store was coughing hysterically and he was coughing and blood started shooting out of his neck and then out of his ear and like each cough just dot dot dot know what that is. But that's the comments toward dying in your head realizing that I can only sustain so for so long the way things are going.


Yeah. I mean, I don't know. We'll see ya crazy times man. I think everybody has to move to Texas selling way to keep comedy alive. They're going to keep LA on lockdown for a long time and definitely seems that way some news hit the today just a little bit ago while we've been on Joe Biden's found the cure for not like that but billboard posted something that just for Ticketmaster for tickets about getting tested and having it linked to an app. Yeah, John Joseph sent me this. Yeah. Yeah that also Vaccines. Yeah, they're going to have it connected to vaccines company Ticketmaster. I saw ticket mask into a Live Nation venue. Yeah, so if you're going to come to a show listen This is very controversial.


Right if I'm all for testing if you can test the day of and then get in like there's rapid test like we did rapid test today. You do a 15-minute test. The problem with the vaccine is right now like the Pfizer vaccine if you read into it 90% are effective. It's really good. But the people that do it they get horrific headaches and real bad hangovers and what they're experiencing sounds a lot worse than what the experienced having actual covid tell me what it was like having actual code. I like I've said it a few times. I thought I was getting a sinus infection. So it felt like was like coming I said, I've had one before it's like, okay.


I know it's about to happen about to maybe have two or three days of knows pain, whatever head pain and never actually came this is so that's why I was like, maybe it's still coming or it's like just never got that how many days was it like that one? I really and I never even felt like worse than maybe six. Seventy percent of normal life. I was like, I just kind of I'm starting to feel funky whatever maybe tomorrow will be worse and it was like not worse. It was not really much better, but it wasn't a whole I wasn't worse and then even as days went by though a little bit and that's when I came in I was like, I think I'm fine. I don't feel bad a couple days ago, but not now. Yeah, you didn't think you had it you thought you had.


Hay fever some right? Yes. I thought because I was looking online Ragweed is Bose real bad here. They said even like don't go outside if you have Ragweed allergy is it's like very very bad stay inside today. Yeah, people get weird allergies the weird allergies out here. There's a cedar allergy around here, but it's not really Cedar forget with also know it's a kind of plant. It's a tree it's a type of tree. It's not really Cedar. It's like Juniper or some shit called Cedar fever. But what is it actually look, I think it's Juniper. There's something that the gets you For whatever reason they call it cedar allergies, but it's not really Cedar.


But apparently for a lot of folks out here. They don't get it the first year. They don't get it the second year. They get it like the third year yikes. I was like what you can get a park yet says it's symptoms for the cedar fever include fatigue headache facial discomfort a sore throat partial loss of smell and a feeling of having plugged ears. And what is the actual plant that gives you that shit Mountain Cedars is what this says hmm your favorite allergic reaction to pollen from Mountain Cedars 42, Texas Med Clinic. Oh It could be a different. Why don't you Google? Also Cedar fever is actually from blank. Because someone was telling me that it's a different plans.


Like why do they call it Cedar fever then? He's like, huh? But anyway, they're gonna blame it blame it on. This is a joke, but this is leaving on the pottery are key. There's a the patriarchy does that I say patriarchy Jamie so addicted to bullshit because he was a patriarchy that's another that's what the thing says. Well hawtree Arceus. Oh funny picture make a funny. Oh tree patriarchy. Yeah. What is the actual plant though? They say in theaters as well. Maybe the guy who told me I was different is full of shit. Maybe he's one of those guys likes to know things but it doesn't believe in Google.


That's weird man. Those fucking bullshit artists used to be a thing. You know guys are just tell you stuff and you're like really? Yeah, man. Well when JFK was killed they immediately went underground like what do you think would have happened if the JFK if I don't know this is a weird question to ask you today or at the internet existed then but what do you think would have been different about that if that had happened during an Information Age like this or would it not have happened the murder? Yeah see Jeffrey Epstein here's here's the thing Point. Here's the thing about murders today. It is equally horrific as murders in 1963, but there's also more information coming at you it never ends.


Never ends. It's like voting controversy and Tifa takes over Seattle. Fucking Donna Donna Donna Donna Donna Donna Donna tongue. You just constantly get inundated with information support we forget about what you were mad at two days ago. Yeah, that's that's part of the problem with today. It's you get an information overload. Like I was telling you I don't remember having this conversation with someone on a podcast that I just saw a clip of Mike. Oh, yeah, I fucking completely forgot about that guy that Is like like if I had a really interesting conversation with if it was rare for me to have an interesting conversation with people if I worked in a factory and very rarely I get to sit down have a cup of coffee with some scientists who tells you some really cool shit.


I would be telling everybody about that story. I be like dude. I have this conversation three hours just mean the scientist. He was telling me all kinds of crazy shit. I would have remember all of it. But I see too many I have too many too many of those stories and they just get lost in my head. I think that's how we are with everything today. That's why no one gives a fuck who killed Jeffrey Epstein this if you like had a national like there was a clock or a chart rather that showed National interest in the Jeffrey Epstein murder. It was like 20% and now it's like zero zero zero point one. Yeah. No, he doesn't fuck. No one's Google Jeffrey Epstein murder on Twitter, you know like three crazy people that also R into q and on and there.


They're bringing up the Epstein things now someone found the records remember to records from the flight logs around. Everyone's fuck draw going to jail. Came and went nobody cares Bill Gates went g r Bill Gates went. Came and went nobody cares. Nobody cares, right my brownies. Like I was a summer when that stuff came out. Yeah back onto down and Elsa. That's how we are. That's I mean, they probably anticipated that when they kill them. Yep, you know, there's so much news. Yep. Yeah, the probably just figured we'd get away with this. And the content and if things get more and more chaotic, which they appear to be doing it's going to get worse with that, you know, it's gonna get even more strange.


It's gonna get weirder and weirder and weirder Tony. Where do you think it all goes? Where does this crazy never-ending news cycle Mexico starts. Be more safe. The United States people start moving to Mexico United States gets more and more crazy or you go to Canada. But Canada isn't let us in it's too cold. There. We well it's not even that they don't want us feel great. I'm glad they don't. We do come Mexico Canada becomes United States. It's not too cold air it you and I've been there I know but we go. Yeah, we go straight into a car and straight to a hotel and straight to the venue and straight to a restaurant and then back home number we talked about this on the show when that story leaked about is like a hot mic ABC News producer got obscene thing.


Yeah, NBC wasn't it was a VC a different ones you suing ABC for ten million dollars the same it was I wrong. Is it NBC or ABC? The lady Au X ABC News staffers Sue's Disney or own network over leak Jeffrey Epstein tape Ashley. Oh, it is ABC number seeking Tenma. Yeah. Okay. I was wrong then according to New York. I thought it was NBC. She's there was the tape there. Like I can't believe they all right. I wouldn't put it out blah blah. You said her and I don't know. I was a different one. This is not the reporter. This is the girl who found the right. The reporter was the girl who was on it saying I broke that story. I knew that We with the then they buried it. Yeah, she should have fired for leaking at or something like that.


I think oh that girl got fired for leaking the tape. Oh good for her good for her. Hope someone hires her. Remember, I think we like there's she's doing what they're supposed to do like labeling things with certain whatever and then it just like they're like, how did this leak? Hmm. She said she didn't do it. So she did good. She should that's a crazy thing to hide. Here's the tape. That's it. That's her. Yeah. Yeah. Good, whatever happened to that lady the lady who leaked to see the real worry is that they would blackballed something like that. Keep them from working again? Someone needs to come up with a legit Network online like a legit News Network.


Of like really trusted news people. And just give them total autonomy never restrict them and then give them a security detail everywhere. They go expensive fuck. Yeah it is but if you think about how much money they make it like Fox news and weather what they want to go seek a story you gotta like fly to somewhere stay in a hotel for weeks weeks weeks. Hey money to you know, get get information. Yeah. Oh, no doubt. It's not cheap. Look at what's happening right now with Fox News, you know people are Anthony Fox News because they think that Fox News is turning on conservatives because they are there was people in the Trump campaign that were talking about the election results election results being fraudulent and all these different things and so Fox News said this is these are unfounded accusations.


So they cut away from this guy explain this and conservatives are freaking out right because with Fox News is trying to Say is like hey you guys this is not this is not true according to them or it's at least not accurate. Like the amount of voter fraud is not accurate, or maybe it's not enough to sway the election one way or another it has been proven. So when someone says it they for whatever reason decide that they're going to stop that person saying it from broadcasting it on the air. It's an interesting choice because on one hand I see their point. If it's not true, you really shouldn't put it on the air but on the other hand, it's like the president's people are saying this so it makes it news even if it's not accurate your support.


I think you're supposed to let it air and then say this is what's wrong with what he said in terms as far as what we know right now, but it's a tough call. If you are the head of fox and someone starts coming out on the air and saying some shit that you think is fake. What do you do? What do you do especially if he's not really the president anymore? Right? It's like they're if it seems like it's going to be Joe Biden in office. You got to make a you gotta hedge your bets because if you get into a situation where imagine if in this is not outside of what's possible imagine if whether it's Biden or the next Administration where the fuck it is gets into power and they say we're going to make laws.


That punish people for spreading false propaganda for punish people who spread fake news. We're going to make laws against it and we're going to decide what's fake and what's real. And so then Fox News gets find a hundred million dollars five hundred million dollars. They get they get there. They go blank. They go dark for a week. They have to stay off the air for weeks and crazy shit. Yeah, because they decide that they're enemies of the current Administration and the current Administration gets the support of the people. Because the port is a people like if most of the people are into the president and they like what if they have control of the house or control the you know, they control that technically they could do it.


You never know not now right now. I don't think they can do it, but it's not impossible. If you think of the people that have been silenced from Twitter right people been kicked off at Twitter people have been kicked off of Facebook, New York Post New York Post got kicked off a Twitter for that hundred Biden store. That would have never you've never I'd have imagined that be impossible just a few years ago, right but it's possible now. So now we have a new sense of what's possible. If you keep taking that further and further, you can see how Fox News be like, hey kill that right. We got a business here Rupert Murdoch. He's alive, right Rupert Murdoch's not alive anymore.


Now, this son's got it. No, right or no the adjust the control. I don't but he's still alive. Yeah, the other guy died the owner doesn't Rupert. Superhot wife thinks a superhot wife and that would make sense. Yeah. I heard she's a real fox, you know don't come on, but I'm pumped come on. There's something about those like purely transactional relationships. Oh, yeah. What's the new one Jaggers X Y is altering what? Come On Son for real. Let me see a picture of her and him together. Give me that one right there.


Whoa. Oh, yeah danger zone waiting. She's waiting. Well, maybe he's nice to her. Wow. She was hot as fuck back when she's with Nick Jesus Christ. Let me see that upper left picture that you just clicked on upper left. No, I believe yeah, we do that again. Hmm. That's checking his pulse. He's nice to her a just holding onto that. She loves them. The I'm horny maybe wasn't look at that. Look at that hot bodies got does about Buddy. You really in the like Anatomy you want to know where the skeletons are like, that's what I like in a man. I want to know where all his joints are. I don't want anything to be cloaked by Meat. There's his heart very clearly.


I could see it beating through his weird translucent ribcage. Don't don't don't don't don't don't how old do you think you're going to live to be? I don't really think about it. Hmm, honestly if nothing happened if If you were to go natural causes because you're a very very healthy guy. What would you guess if you were to go with from old age as healthy as you are the life stay wealthy. Yeah, I'm gonna live. Yeah, unless I do something really stupid. Now you're going to stay wealthy. It's going to be interesting you'd have to really go heat up to to some pretty crazy stuff. I mean islands and Islands, right?


Yeah. I'm not into buying things like that. Right? I think I think it's possible today to live to be a hundred twenty. Yeah, I think with the right and I think what we're dealing with now we're on the cusp of what's possible. I want us out. I don't want to say any names but I was having a conversation the other day with a billionaire a very wealthy man who believes going to live to be 200 years old. Wow. Yeah, he's explaining to me all the different things that he does and where he thinks like medicine and science is going to go any simple advice. Is there a secret out there celery juice or still do all the things? In this podcast don't drink whiskey and smoke cigars.


I think for sure exercise. It seems to be the number one thing. You have to keep your body moving. You have to give you blood flowing and you have to keep your body strong keep your body vital. There's a difference between working out and overtraining overtraining seems bad for you. I have a friend. He's 28 who caught the covid and he's in really Good shape but he caught it when he was working out really hard. He was doing a fitness instructional and he was training way way way too hard like really beat his body down and then he caught it and he got it pretty bad. He had it bad for a couple weeks. He's young and healthy.


So the thing about training and this is the thing about guys training for fights. They get sick a lot. It's because you're you're you're breaking your body down you're getting This like there's a fine line between training hard and overtraining. It's a really fine line and it's it's hard for people to find the exact spot to land in. You know, a lot of Fighters overtrain Tim Kennedy. The guy we talked about earlier. He famously overtrained for his last fight with Kelvin Gastelum because he had a fight cancel. He went through a full six-week training camp and then fight cancelled and then he got another fight come up in another six weeks or five weeks.


I think and he went straight. I'm not sure about the time but he went straight into another full camp and the by the end of that camp. He was so tired. He just never gave himself you body can't sustain like Peak Performance levels for very long. You can sustain a good level for a long time. But you got to know when to Peak and when to back off and really good fight trainers. They know when a fighter is too sharp. They look you're peeking. We're going to pull you back. So the pull them back and they'll say take a few days off. They'll tell you like go watch TV Go Lounge in the pool swim a little bit. Just relax go for a hike. Chill the fuck out let your body recover.


Let your body recover. Let all that broken down tissue rebuild itself. Let your body just rebound and then come back at it again, but do it slowly. So the Smart Ones they're monitoring heart rate heart rate variability this thing that I wear the loop strap, that's that's all about. It's all about monitoring. What how well your body. Recovered like every morning when I check my app I check my whoop app and it tells me how well I've recovered from the night before whether or not I'm in like what whether or not I'm good to go for today or whether or not I should take it easy day you like the show you based on your heart rate variability but a lot of guys don't do it that way. They just don't want to be a pussy. You know, they just want to keep pushing and keep pushing and you can break your body down doing that and that's when guys get sick and if you get sick when your body's already tired and compromise and then a virus gets in there.


R and weakens you even further you can get really sick. I had pneumonia once for a tournament that I went to is when I was training really I was training like a moron. I never wore a heart rate monitor. I wasn't even taking vitamins back then. I was just eating whatever and training like a terrorist and then I came out here. Oh, I came out to California fought in this tournament in Anaheim. I was 19. So it was like 86 1986. I fought in the Nationals and Anaheim and I had pneumonia. And I fought three times with pneumonia was horrible and then the next day I was so so fucking beating down. I was so tired and I can't believe I was like, how did I fight yesterday?


Like what the fuck but that's also what happens when you're you you take yourself past Fitness and you don't want to be a pussy. So you keep pushing keep pushing, but it's really dumb like a smart athlete knows when to back off like an experienced athlete knows their body. Lee well and they know when to back off but the right way to do it is with heart rate monitors the right way to do it is like Steve Maxwell told me that a long time ago. You should check your heart rate in the morning and if it's more than x amount of beats per minute over your standard resting heart rate. It means your body hasn't recovered yet. So you should not work out that day. It's hard for people to do that or if you do work out you should work out really light like maybe do some positional drills.


It doesn't tax your body like do some things where you like framing and just go through everything in slow. The motion where you never really break yourself down but it's it's also sometimes people want to do too much too soon. Like my friend cam Haynes. Yeah campaigns when he's training for Ultra marathons will run a marathon every day. It's not fake like I've seen him do it. I know he does it. He shows me his fucking his his his Under Armour app that he uses or tracks his his is distance every day. It's bananas, but he's done it because he's done that. Slowly but surely he's built up this base over Decades of training hard.


You couldn't just go out and do that. And if you ask like these to be conventional science or conventional wisdom rather would be that if you run a marathon you need to take six months off. It's right marathons every day because there's levels like you can build up. So the athletes of stay in shape. I have a much better chance at getting through a training camp and not being overtrained but the athletes that take a lot of time off and party. Those are the ones that wind up a foul. I think I'm going to pee my pants Oh Gopi. Okay. Jamie's gone to You're Gonna Be with Jamie. This is the first time ever that I've been left alone on a podcast ladies and gentlemen, and I already talked too much.


So now what to do. I think that all of us are real nervous right now. I think this is a an unprecedented time in history where everyone is wondering what's going to happen. Next. Everyone is wondering and it's so easy to say that we need to be more empathetic and we need to be more nice to each other. But I really do think that that is something that we need to concentrate on this idea that like people are making lists. of people that voted for Trump and supported Trump and and that they're they're going to put them on these lists and they're going to send these lists out to potential employers and you got to give people the opportunity to make mistakes and you got to keep give people the opportunity to grow and gotta give people the opportunity to have a different opinion than yours and just to say that if you support that guy you support this or that or whatever horrible thing it is whether you think it's ISM or fascism or whatever ISM it is a really think.


Now more than ever is the time to come together as a country and to realize this is not healthy for anybody to divide ourselves into these two groups. And the more we push against the especially the people that want the people in the Biden camper. Now I now we're going to make little even AOC wrote that we're going to make a list of all the sycophants and supporters are Trump like I don't think that's the right way to do it. I think historically black lists and lists of people that are forbidden from working or forbidden from being considered a part of accepted culture.


It's very dangerous people are malleable and people they make mistakes. They fall into groups of people that have different opinions and We just got to be legitimately got to be nicer to each other. That's what I think and it sounds so cliche that we have to be nicer to each other. But that's what this country fucking needs. We need to realize like yeah. Yeah, it's fucked up. Yeah, we're in a fucked up Place. Yeah that's fucked up that people are riding in the streets and fucked up that there's police brutality and it's fucked up that this covid. It's fucked up. The people are losing their jobs, but the only thing we have together if we really truly our community is treat each other like we're Community, you know, you could be like if I imagine a world where there's a Republican and a Democrat living right next door to each other and they jump around and they laugh about stuff and they talk to each other and they have different opinions what I've Snopes not a steady like a five minute I need to I can't just sit here for a little bit and you go to bathroom.


Oh, okay Let It Rock. I thought you went I did you came back when you saw I'll go back and I'll I gotta you don't have to tell us what's happening. Jamie just seemed kind of piece short and I was balls are aching. It's got a shit. So shoot himself. Wow. Yeah, I really had to pee and then I was I'd reached maximum pee and then once I saw Jamie go, I'm like Jamie's peeing and then I really started thinking about And I simply couldn't take it anymore. I understand people really, you know, they bet a lot of people it towards the middle end of your podcast. You don't realize it because your body's, you know, superhuman or whatever but they have to pee a lot because people get extra hydrated.


Oh, yeah to do your show then they drink coffee and whiskey yeah makes you pee. Yeah. I don't know why I don't have to pee. I don't have to be at all weird. Sometimes I do though. I've had podcast we're particularly after yoga because after Yoga, I drink a fuckload of water because I do that hot yoga and I'll drink I'll bring a 64-ounce Hydro Flask with me filled with ice and water. I drink that whole thing during a yoga class then afterwards. It's we just ppppp. Yeah, can't stop it. Yeah, it happens man. The you worried about the Future Tony. Yeah. Sure. I mean no more than I was two years ago. Really? Yeah. It's no different.


It's just a different focus on it, you know, it's different how so I'm just I'm just concerned about. You know that here let me do this. Let's go back to what you were just talking about being about being nicer to one. Another in a unified front is I had this thought the other day which was I was thinking about America after 9/11 when we had a terrorist attack and we had what appeared to be a clear enemy and it brought us all together. That's probably the closest we've all been together right as a country. Sure. And then how old are you?


Boy, I was in high school as a sophomore in high school. So I don't know 1615. Hmm. How will you know 36? Yeah, that makes sense because I was I think I was 30. And I think I remember I remember hearing about it Go, holy shit, but couldn't believe me. I was 31. I couldn't believe it. And then I remember thinking wow everyone so unified all these people with American flags on their cars to remember that super easy. Super unified Remember Jay London. Yeah, Jay London needs to sell those American flies. You stick on your car. Wow. Really? Yeah Jay and I is that pre Last Comic Standing?


Yeah. Yeah. Yeah because Last Comic Standing was later in the 2000s, right? Wasn't it? I think so mm three or four he was on Last Comic Standing that he had a moment in the sun. Yeah. There for a while. Yeah, but before that he was essentially it was just like a street vendor who's selling these American flags little ones that attach to your window your roll up the window on the flag blowing. So one of my conspiracy theories going back on that to that 911 thing is that one of the reasons why this country is sort of turning in on one another is because right now we don't have for the first time in Forever because we're pulling out troops of everywhere.


We don't have an enemy, you know, we don't have an actual targeted. Let's unify to beat this opponent type of situation instead troops are coming home for the first time in forever from Afghanistan and this and that and we've realized that we are we were we were we were fooled into getting into Iraq and all of this other stuff. It's all becoming so clear and since we don't have an enemy we're starting me too. There's a little bit of that for sure. Yeah, and then there's also a covid in the lockdown which exacerbated everything because so many people are stressed out and out of work to some crazy number like 30 percent of the people in this country can't pay rent, right?


Yeah that's never happened before in our lifetime if anything and how does that bounce back? That's my point about Melrose like in a big city who's going to invest in going back into those places, you know, when you see these clothes down places to bring them back. Up to start to imagine a time where you're going to drive down Melrose and all those stores are filled again, and there's all hustle and bustle and traffic and people walking on the streets and not dangerous fucking gangsters everywhere. I could seems weird now, right? Yeah and sometimes it picks up, you know a nice warm Saturday afternoon. It's it looks sort of the same out there sort of yeah thirty percent.


I know it's weird. I'm trying to rationalize is it in my head but not the same it's not know. I remember we did this thing for The Comedy Store where I was Whitney Cummings and Bill Burr and Paul Rodriguez and Annie Letterman and Jay Leno and me. We're on a roof with Mike binder and and we were is the first time I've been in Hollywood in long time. And the first time I've been at the store and a long time and it was really emotional and it was sad and I was sitting there hanging out and you realize there's no On Sunset no one and every now and then like Lamborghinis would go racing down Sunset like flying like you would hear Bob.


I don't like going 90 miles an hour plus down Sunset. No cops. I was like, this is crazy. Like this is so strange. It's very surreal. One of the last times I was at the comic store. I got pulled over because my muffler was too loud. The cop pulled you over I pulled me over. So what's that? Like that's just seems like a scene out of a comedy movie cop walks up to you. And then what does he have for the ID? No, no, it goes. Um, I was pulling you over because your Mufflers too loud I go. It's it's a factory Muffler, right?


Like it's I have an M3 from 2005. It's a diamond and it comes with a diamond Muffler. You know. What an E46 is E46 M3. Really? There's a sweet spot. In the do you know anything about BMWs used to have it? Would you have a 5 5 Series? Yeah, beautiful car. Yeah, great car that year that you had was 2002-2004 something like same year as the E46. It's the lot of people think it's the Goldilocks zone of BMWs because it's before BMW became this really cushy like luxury car and was more of a driver-focused car and my the year.


That I have is 2005 actually got it from a guy who contact Jamie who we were talking about E46 is like I got one that only has 15,000 original miles. It's a silver E43. It's beautiful. It's like a classic looking car but it has a it's not that loud. This cop was just looking for shit fuck with people by and if I was just some asshole, right or maybe young black guy. I might be getting a ticket. I might be in trouble or he's just decided to pull me over for nothing. I wasn't speeding at all. I just took a right out of The Comedy Store parking lot and all sudden the lights were on like immediately.


I pulled over and he pulls over and I go what did I do? And he goes seems like you got an aftermarket Muffler in your car I go. Hey me I go how you doing? And he goes hey, what's up I go. I don't have an aftermarket Muffler I go into diamonds is the way it comes from the factory. Oh, yeah, it was what seemed pretty loud. He goes we're ever for me I go. Okay. There's a little boom boom. It's like yeah, that might be too loud. You might want to get that checked I go. Okay. What do I do now? He's like nothing. You're all right, I go. Okay. Hey guys. I'm not really trying to pull people over this, you know, we're looking for bad guys and drunk drivers ago. I understand as okay and I'm like, all right.


That was a that was a Fame privileged moment, right and a white privileged moment one knows. Driving away from that knowing like if I was just at a 25 year old kid white black whatever. I was probably getting a ticket for a loud Muffler. It wasn't even loud. It was just a cop looking to fill he had like you probably have like this is controversial because some cops say it's not true and I've talked to Cops to say it is true. Like they have a number of tickets that they have to write in a week or a month or whatever and they get in trouble if they Don't write enough shit. And so this guy was like that. That doesn't seem that soft.


Let me pull this dude over just no reason. Yeah, just that was it there was no sir. I mean I was he was going left. I was going right. He did a u-turn pulled me over. It was instantaneous. Yeah. I got off on a warning recently. The guy just lied to me. It's like I got you doing was it 45 in a 35? Are now he know it was more point out that you drive a Corvette. Yeah, you probably were doing 45. Yeah, but I realized you didn't say 45. I knew I was doing 45 in a 35. He said I was doing like 49 or something like that, but I knew I wasn't because I did literally this model Corvette has like three speedometers that you can't miss the other digit giant digital one.


There's one there and then there's one on the other side that shows you another speed what you have more than once but almost positive they're sinking of attack you fucking A Luddite you don't even know what you have. Oh my God. What are you talking? Who cares? I got the engine. Oh, it's a tachometer. It shows you how many revolutions per minute your engine's going. You fucking dummy. I know what an RP is don't call it a tack. I'm not such a cool car guy, aren't you talking about its standard? This is what you have. You have a speedometer and the tachometer. They're right next to each other on every single car. That's a performance car. You know what there is there's a regular speedometer. I'm almost positive that I think the regular one a digital one and then the digital one tells you right in the middle exact numbers, right and then roll over the digital one on top of the RPMs.


There's also one that digitally shows you to digital ones. You don't know what the fuck yeah, there. It is. Wait. First of all, that one you're looking at is a fucking tack. On the left. Yeah. No, the on the left is a speedometer that one in the middle is attack that's attacked tachometer. Yeah, and in the tachometer then as miles per hour in the center of the tack, right? So the Tak will show you when you hit red line if using your paddle shifters, so most of the time a lot like you I'm sure you put it in drive like a fucking door. You don't even use those paddles. Do you who needs them? Oh, you know what?


It's like if you press the pedal all the way down and drive goes fast. Yeah, it's all you care about right? Yeah, it's the best feeling in the world. And even you don't need a clutch. I need any of it. You'll need to shift if you shift it for yourself ever. Yeah, this is grown man. Yeah, it's a lot of fun last time you did it in that car. I don't know. No, I mean a real shift left foot clutch. I used to have right hand. Yeah. I used to have one would you have well, I used to own and a Hyundai Elantra. Oh, yeah or D powerful thing. Me prepared for my Corvette but no I when I rent cars and stuff sometimes on the road.


I'll get one but yeah, they don't write you a stick-shift sure. They do who are they who's writing you stitches that there's a lot of janky cities out there Joe. Really? Yeah. What do you like? What do you rent was the last time you went to a stick shift? I can't I don't I mean it's all a blur keep making shit up. Go ahead. What do you mean? You don't think rental cars have stick shift they do but you have to like really ask for it. Most of the time they drive automatics like there's stickers that people put on cars that's a anti theft deterrent and it just shows a manual transmission because most people just don't know how to drive a manual. I liked it. I mean I and if then if the car was manual I would have I would have done that.


It's fun. It's fun to have stuff to do. I like it. That's really what it is and have stuff to do. Yeah, they're on their way out manuals. Yeah, unfortunately. You know these have manuals on motorcycles, whereas an actual stick shift the really old ones. Yeah, Josh Serling. He's the owner of black bear brand. They're real cool clothing company. They built me this really dope leather jacket man. It's really cool. He makes like really interesting handmade stuff like clothing and shit and he's into like craftsmanship and old stuff and he has a motorcycle. I think it's like if you go to his Instagram black bear R brand he drives his really old motorcycle.


There's Brad Pitt doing it. It's I think they call it a suicide shifter because you have to reach down and matter Brad Pitt beautiful Z is no helmets driving around see it in the upper right hand corner that picture. That's what it's like. So you shift like a clutch like you press and shifted by hand. Just go to Black Bear brand on Instagram because he does it he's got videos of him driving through tunnels. It looks So badass and he sat I talked to him about it. He was like, it's the most alive I ever feel he goes the tank only lasts for like 20 miles like is this little-ass tank and this engine eats gasps. It's so inefficient because it's really old bike but he's just and shifting with one arm on The Handlebar and shifting like this, but there's something about there.


He is look at this because Josh so he's driving this thing and then when he shifts see that thing, Over by his dick that's a shifter. Look at that c has to reach down to shift gears. Weird, right? Yeah, how could they make a motorcycle more dangerous? First time I ever saw that was a drug dealer in Phoenix. I met this drug dealer when we were at The Improv in Tempe call. Yeah, that's about right. Yeah, and he's like, hey man, come hang out with us also cut to you holding on him in the back of his motorcycle has a is right as crazy shifter. You got there didn't avoided them.


Yeah, he just seemed like trouble it was a little too enthusiastic about hanging a little Coke cocaine enthusiastic. Yeah that Tempe Improv is wow. Yeah well Tempe is college town and it's surrounded by like that Scottsdale area, which is notoriously its upper town. But this place where I think Tyson got arrested there for Coke. It's a lot of coke. Like I didn't, you know, I'm ignorant Coke. I've never done it and you soon never not once but I was with red band who's done a lot and red. Dad and I were in a club and he goes, you know, everyone's on Coco what he was looking around.


Everyone's talking real loud to each other and they're all touching the nose and it was almost like I couldn't unsee it anymore. I was like, oh my God, he's like dude. Everyone's on coke here. Yeah, I go. Wow! Oh really? He goes. Yeah the wrong Coke. Yeah makes sense though. Yeah. What's that Scottsdale area? A lot of Rich folk? Well people like to party. Yeah. I like hanging out with those people because I don't get tired until 4:00 5:00 6:00 a.m. Normally in Old normal life. So I sometimes I just I'm completely oblivious to it and I don't realize that they're doing that and they don't want me to know that they're doing it. So they keep it secret from me and everybody wins. We're all having fun Have You Ever Had the desire to try it and see what the fuss is all about.


Now. There's nothing really with with anything. That's an upper that excites me one time. I took a half of one of Pain pills that my dentist gave me when I had a wisdom tooth removed and I immediately half and he told me to take two or something crazy like take two of these if you feel any pain I took a half of one and I could see how people would love to do heroin and all of it. I could immediately the warm sweaty feeling of happier happiness went over me. I was smiling ear to ear. Just so happy.


And so that's a scary one. And that that was done. I remember one time. I got a hold of the old-school NyQuil. This is like in the 90s. I was sick. I got ahold of old-school NyQuil and I took it and I was lying in bed and they're just like I was like melted into my pillow. Yeah. Yeah, because the good just drift away just be comforted. Fuck you. The womb. Yeah, like everything's going to be okay, Tony. Everything's gonna be okay. You're gonna get a big warm hug by the world. That's it. That's exactly how I felt that day.


Hmm. We can the argument for people that don't have anything going on in their life, like watch that not do that, right, you know, right? Luckily. I had already started the adventure doing stand-up and all that and had a reputation or whatever because I could totally Percent see myself doing it made me feel so good. Yeah. Well, I think a lot of people if you don't have a good enough Like a discipline a thing you're into that requires work that you really get joy out of if you don't have that and then you find the drug early before you've had the good feeling of accomplishment right that drug feeling could take you over and then it's really hard to like sacrifice.


It's really hard to do Embrace discomfort when you're really into that codeine feeling they just drift away all your worries. Go away, Tony. Yeah, that's the big problem with people with opioid addictions. You know, if you don't have something better than that a lot of people like why should I abandon it right now? And it's a it's a tough argument because what's your argument for that? What do you say? Hey, you should suffer in a factory. You should you should work your way up to a mediocre existence of debt and struggle and hate your job every day and stay clean.


Yeah, that's rough. What do you do? What do you tell them? That's the that's the number one problem. I think people have when they don't have a lot going for them and they also get into drugs. Like how do we how do you fix that? What do you think about mushrooms being legal now in Oregon to steroids are illegal in Oregon? Well legal rather. Everything's legal. Well, that's what I'm going to do. I'm going to go to Oregon get fucking bucket Josh rip my balls off become like Dorian Yates do acid whose story and yeah, how dare you I Dare You Dorian Yates one of the greatest bodybuilders of all time, you know Lee Haney is now son of a bitch it does Ronnie Coleman. Does he use attack speedometer now? I know Ron Coleman Columbus Ohio the Ohio State University.


Okay. Clearly. Yeah, Ronnie Coleman, Ohio. Ronnie Coleman was Mark Coleman. I am thinking of our clone bitch. That's a white guy right everybody calm. It's like one of the greatest bodybuilders of all time. He was so big. He doesn't even seem real look at Ron. Coleman she's the Sonata here. Yeah, he did the podcast recently and his look how big he was dude. He was so big now that guy I could picture throwing an ice pick in one of one of his biceps. Oh, yeah. He wouldn't even notice it. Yeah, he's had every single disc in his back fused except like one or two. I think a bunch of back surgeries.


His back is all fucked up from just lifting in Immense amount of weight and pushing themselves like to be that big and that strong like you have to have a crazy work ethic. Look at his back go to that upper right hand corner picture. Look at that. What the fuck? That's alien God. That's so crazy. This butt cheeks. Jeez Louise Jesus goodness, Jesus. Yeah, so that's what you look like if you move to Oregon start lift, and there's Dorian. Look at Dorian Dorian has also been on the podcast. He's a normal sized guy now, Now but back then when he was the champ go to that one in the middle right there. Bam. Look that dumb fucking Come On Son.


Let's go. That's the size of him. That's what I look like after lifting a 25-pound kettlebells a few times Brown in my head. Look at the size of him. He was for his day like extraordinarily massive and that was like he sort of was one of the group of the next level of bodybuilders at the took mass to a new level and he when he you know, he talked about it on the podcast. He said he basically lived like a monk like all he did was eat and trained like he was just obsessed with being the best. Is it just a life of pain tearing your muscles so that they build grow back thicker.


Again, and again and again, that's a lot of it, but it was just the results. It was addicted to standing on that stage going bam and everybody black. Holy shit. He wanted to just unveil that's like people have a narrow-minded perspective of what art is, you know, and I think bodybuilding is an art but I think it's an art that only people who participate in it truly appreciate these a lot of Arts like that I think pools and aren't like that like when I watch it, I like I was saying Efren Reyes want to watch him play you watch that guy play like wow, like the way he gets out. I think it's beautiful. But only people really understand pool know how difficult the shots are or how change the angle with English and and I think bodybuilding when you see a guy like Dorian Yates or like Lee Haney or like Ronnie Coleman when they get to that Peak form when there on that stage, like only a person who really knows how difficult it is to be that massive and that shredded and Standing there with veins on your feet all the way up to your calves thighs your fucking all the way up to your neck in your head that's massive crazy dedication.


It's steroids and dehydration and there's so much involved in reaching that Peak form when you get on stage like the really unhealthy when they get on stage like that moment when they're shredded their super dehydrated. Yeah, they cut all the water. Yeah yikes. It's a big guy likes it's a crazy way to live but for them because they understand the dedication involve. Like people that are really into that man. That's all I got tight-knit community of people that are really into like looking shredded and vascular and what it means to be that guy, you know, yeah, mr. Olympia. As you can tell by my body not really my thing well, but fewer things killing killing on stage like I was talking to.


Oh, I've talked to a bunch of comics about this, but I think recently I was talking to Sagar about it, like imagine living your whole life never killing never knowing what it's like Just just Crush. Thank you. Good night, you know to lay down and Netflix special, you know and have people watch it all around the country. I can't go with that it and now it's hard doing it tonight that weekend that we did in Houston, man. So the last time I do those July really August September October November those four months ago. There was only one weekend. Imagine how much fun you'd have if you came out tonight Cheers Cheers, maybe well, I'm a little fucked up.


It's gonna be fun. You and me and Mom and white, who else is on the show The Young Tony Casillas. You can call me young Tony to see us. There was one young huh? Jung, Jae min. Oh, I don't know. Is he still young Jamie after the coronavirus? Didn't that put a little no sick for a day son of a bitch. Look at them beat it. Okay, because he's young Jamie. Yeah, we got mad because you got gray hair now and I still call him young ask the have stopped dying and I've always had fucking great. You start having gray hair kind of 12, you know, you can go to a hair salon out here. Well Jo black want to get cornrows? Why don't you go once you get cornrows?


I've had it once cornrows. Yeah, I need to see that picture. Do I have a picture of it? I'll give you a raise of your cornrows. Oh that I caught a glance. He just gave you in trouble. If you wear cornrows, will that be culture appropriation of the have they let that go probably I would imagine so Yeah, it's for white girls. It's a real issue. But for a guy might be a goof I would it hurt. Imagine. It's a very tight Urijah Faber got that when he fought because Uriah the California kids got some long hair. Yeah, we get some cornrows you can do it during a show you could just have one of the cornrow people behind them doing it with the Pig and the whole deal Porsche was when I was still in a band.


I had long hair back then I forgot you were in a band. Wait how many recordings Pierce? Yes. Well, we're going to end the show. Yeah, we have to no no. No, it's not good. No, that's why it's good. Come on. Let me make funny as it on YouTube. No, it would there was no YouTube. This is long time ago. I think it's on you too, baby. No fuck. It's not we should put it on YouTube. We should put on the JRE ciao. Probably not. I'm you have it. You wouldn't even know. I'm in the Band knows I'm not singing. I'm not you know, what do you plan on playing bass and guitar in the band? So like there's a bunch of other people that they probably wouldn't be big fans of that being out there either. If you thought about bringing that back now that we're in the center of live entertainment, this is place.


I have haven't really thought about coming back Really really nice people last night. We're trying to book me a gig already. I was like, oh my goodness. What was the name of your band shit? Pretty much please. Welcome eat shit. Thank you so much for each. Yeah, good night. And then what kind of music I was like Be metal rock music, you know, dude, you're playing metal. Wow, that's how it turns out. I have an ear for music. Like I turned you on to that fucking bad-ass long by Aaron Jones. Yes, dude. He's really good. I've got into a bunch of his shit because people reached out as he's gonna send us the album.


He said but not done yet. He's very good. He's he's very good and very unique to Seattle sound. I think that's what they're calling it how much good music came out of Seattle. Mm. That is a crazy part of the world a lot of Despair and rainy. He days. Yeah, motherfucker is get go inside like how much good music comes out of Miami. All right. And by the way, you know Seattle has one more day of rain per year than Cleveland and Cleveland has one averages one more day of clouds than Seattle save an equal amount of shitty days. And a lot of great should come from Cleveland. Yeah, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame is so if you think of an Cento from honey, honey, yeah.


Yeah, honey, honey came out of a lot of people. Cleveland, yeah those places that really suck. Those people have a lot of Pride weird. Oh, yeah people like live in places that are awesome. They don't give a fuck about those spots but people that like fucking hang in there Pittsburgh. We're gonna fuckin hang in here Pittsburgh or death, you know, there's a dude came to my Cleveland Show at a t-shirt on it's a Cleveland or death and I put them on my Instagram looks like that shirt needs to be seen. That was what it said right make sense. I'm sure something like that. Yeah, I picked death on that one, but you from Youngstown Ohio people from Youngstown dream of moving to Cleveland.


Yeah. No, I know I'm kidding. But yeah, you know being from those places is great, but getting out of them and getting out of there is better but only works if you get out well assholes fucking Winters man. Yeah, that's I'm talking with Joey Diaz about Joe Rogan fucking winter is going to be a cold one I could feel and I go there's always a place for you in Texas. Yeah. He's dragging winter like a fucking Game of Thrones. Dr. Right now, we're playing games. We're playing games. I'm eventually going to get them out here. It's gonna take some time. It's all white walk at the other day Joe the comment. Let me know when you open up that club you open up that club you'll be there day one. The flood gates will open I'm gonna put out the bat signal because I don't think the comedy store is going to open up and I don't think the club's New York going to open up.


I think it's going to be a while, but we have rapid testing here. We do it at the studio. I think if I hired this is my thought if we have a parking lot and in that parking lot You have a team of 10 nurses and you tell everybody to come an hour before the show shows it ate get here by 7 you get tested. You just have a name you write you everybody wears a mask. You get the it's a quick no swab. It's not hard to do a quick test. Everybody goes inside when you're when you clear and when you're not clear the get you the fuck out of there. Yeah, but I bet most people would be clear. Yeah, and you maybe catch a few here there the didn't know they'd have it right if you have it.


You think you don't feel good. Please don't come or get tested at this resource and come on down and then you have people Get tested they go inside then they can have a drink and wait for the show to start show starts at 8:00 or 8:30. Give people plenty of time that's not unreasonable to ask or not people with before the doors open up at the store people wait in line for longer than 15 minutes, right? Yeah. So if you could have ten nurses, I mean you've got your test today. It literally takes five seconds to administer the task about 10 seconds rights 10 seconds of swabia knows so they swab your nose. They do the test. It takes 15 minutes to get the Results, but you could do that if you have a name and a number like number 79, that's me.


You're clear. All right, good. You got your ticket, maybe have a QR code or something like that. They scan it at the door. It's not hard to imagine that you could do a real show out here the real show like 300 people packed. I can replace the size of The Comedy Store main room 350 400 people you could do that here. Yeah, it's not like because there's a disease doesn't mean there's not a workaround where everybody can still be safe and still be like we're doing right now everyone in this room has been tested. We're okay. So then we can just sit across from each other and have fun and not even think about it. Right that could be done in a comedy club.


It can be done, you know, and is it easy to do right now? No. A little complicated. It's a little expensive but is it better than not doing it? Yeah, especially if you're a fan of Comedy if you know that you can just get tested and you can go perform in front of a real crowd. I packed like the old days where everybody's clean. We're having so much fun. We were having too much fun. But this is the wake-up call. It's a little reminder that you and I and D as an re and Duncan and and so many others we live through the golden years of The Comedy Store. It was the golden years and almost like poetically it ended at the peak.


It was sold out every night. Yeah every night Monday Tuesday, Wednesday Thursday multiple shows at night main room or Remember going in there on a Tuesday night. There was to show sold out in the main room the show know our was completely my they were doing two shows in the or remember that yeah, they started doing an early show in the middle Late Show because there was so many people. Yeah, you had a rotate the crowd belly room is packed packed. Yeah, everything was packed. Those are always two or three shows a night in the belly. Yeah, and people were flying in from all around the world. It was literally the Golden Age of comedy and then it ended and now tell me what you were telling me about. A how fucked up they are they won't even let people you're doing a show with no audience in the main room streaming it to people in the parking lot and they won't let you do it, right they gave they gave The Comedy Store at ticket because we were streaming the show from inside to outside on television.


But but you can also stream other things you can play the Lakers you can play UFC you can show anything you want that's live. You just can't show what's Happening inside the building live outside. to the parking lot So how does that make any sense? Right? It doesn't it's ridiculous. And by the way the system so messed up that one week. It'll be one person then the next week a different person says that that's okay but this isn't allowed and and performing in a Windows. Okay, but streaming it to screens isn't or it changes continuously because there is no consistency and they don't know what to do.


And then at one point it got approved by. West Hollywood that they were allowed to do certain things shows. Yeah in the parking lot. Yeah, they sent out a newsletter. Yep. I was like, oh shit, they're going to do shows in the parking lot. Yeah, and then the city of La shut it down. Yeah, LA County was like nope, even though you're Your Own Thing West Hollywood were not allowing you to do that. Do you think that's political? It's all a mess man. I just I does that make sense. If you can go eat it boa and that's outside. Right? How's that make sense? Right? And also when you factor in that people will be talking less than they would be especially, you know, right around the corner is the Saddle Ranch which is playing music and you have people at tables talking over the music to one another so it is about protecting people from a disease and then you factor in that almost.


Nobody talks during a comedy. Go other than the one person talking and that they're all facing One Direction and it clearly if there were scientists. They'd be like, oh, it's much easier to spread it with the music and that that's totally legal then with that. We're almost nobody's talking. And then the comic store was also proposing a big Shield a plexiglass Shield between the audience and this in the stand. Oh, yeah, and there's still like nope, right because it's live entertainment and they think that if they do that people are going to just start dancing or something making out. I don't know what's going on doesn't make any sense what I talked to Dave Smith about yesterday.


We're like these Governors and these mayor's they also may have power it's very difficult with that power go. It's not it's not nice and they keep getting paid. What? It happened is their income should be based entirely on the income of the city or the state. So when the income the city in the state is drastically reduced the salary of the governor and the salary of the mayor should be radically reduced as well. It's an alien and then you would see how quickly these motherfuckers it opened things up. Yeah, and on that note fuck faces. That's it. That's it. We had tonight. Well, people will find out tomorrow. Yeah, but I'm at I'm at Vulcan gas company tonight in Austin's at you Jamie.


And what is it? Oh shit. This you where are you at that you were at their play this shit. I don't even know what come on play it play it play it will leave with this. That's not good. Play it play it. Oh bad. Give me some volume. Man eats shit's pretty good their last concept of thing eat shit coming to 6th Street. Okay, stop perp turn back on. We're gonna close out with this chase your dreams bitches. I'm in Dallas this weekend though it hyenas hyenas the club for shows. Yeah, I do that I go there all the time. It's so much fun.


Keep that volume going. We working with very good just me. Just you yeah. What happened? Yeah. I'm working with Tony Casillas again is going to be there. And and yeah someone else I'm not sure someone else. Yeah another word credible local talent. All right, tween to guys. Well, that's it Dallas this weekend. Come get some what own handsome golden pony. You're moving here, right? Yes. Yeah. It's just a peg dude. We just gotta get everything open here. So there's moving here red been already bought a house. You know that. Yeah Korea. Come on bitch crazy. Come on. Come on. All right. You can January.


Okay. Anyways, when I'm opening up, okay. Wait, I want to wait until the I want to wait until the new ones Biden gets an office. I want to see what they do. I'm worried about lockdowns. What about Nationwide mandates and weirdness, you know, I'm hoping that they recognize that there's a there's a way to do things open things up and also they recognize that people have to go to work. You can't just keep it ready shut down a lot of waitresses and a lot of waiters and bartenders that got fucked over during this. I don't want to let's bring them back a hundred everybody back to work bring back some comedy. Yeah Tech says let's tone a man. Come on Tony. Okay, I'll do it. I just decided eat shit coming to 6th Street.


We're gonna have to get some new band members looks like the area what's up with the smoke machine so that billiard Hall that they were doing the best they cut billiard Hall you play pool and had music walk going on. We had two singers. A lot happening, but guys screaming he's got one guy sounds like tool the other guy sounds like Mega that was the goal. That's the goal figure this out diffusion you newest back then no good night. Everybody. Good luck. Godspeed. Let's keep it together bitches. Whoa. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you, too. For somatic. This month for somatic is running a special sale. You can stock up on everything you need to support your immune system with up to 50% off to claim this deal.


You must go to force agnostic.com Rogan. This offer is only for JRE listeners. It's not available on the regular website. Go to fo you are SI G. M-- ATI c.com Rogan To get yourself some delicious and nutritious mushroom coffee full discount applied at check out. We're also brought to you by butcher box. Put your box makes it easy to get high-quality humanely raised meat that you can trust and for a limited time new members can get a free Thanksgiving turkey when you sign up for butcher Box by going to butcher box.com Rogan.


That's butcher box.com Rogan go there and get a free turkey in your Order whoo. Come on up. We're also brought to you by Trager grills. My absolute all-time 100 percent favorite way to cook. There is no question. I love them more than any other way to cook. It's an amazing company with fantastic grills whole bunch of different ones to choose from and they're amazing application that has over 1500 plus recipes and you can control your grill from anywhere. You can literally cook anything on a trigger. I love them and they're available online or in 10,000 Plus stores nationwide.


Visit Trager grills.com Joe and use the code Rogan at checkout for free shipping and we're also brought to you by CB D MD and they're amazing CBD products. I love their gummies. Their gummies are like candy that's actually good for you. I love their topicals. I love their oil. I love everything and to make it even Easier for you to try this amazing Duel of topicals and everything else is CBD MD has to offer they're offering JRE listeners 25 percent off your next order when you use the promo code Rogan at checkout. So once again that CBD em d.com use the promo code Rogan for twenty five percent off your purchase of superior CBD products from CBD MD.


Thank you friends for tuning into the show much. Love to you all.