
Hello f_riends, welcome to the show this episode is brought to you by Roca. I wear check them out at our okay a.com. You probably heard me talk about the sunglasses. It's all I wear. I wear them every day. They're the shit. They're really well made. They hug your head. They're perfect because they have these bendable titanium temples. So they wrap around behind you and stay in place. Well, they make awesome shit, but they also make awesome prescription eyeglasses and the only prescription eyeglasses. Glasses on the planet that are actually made from scratch to do badass shit. I'm telling you if you wear glasses. These are the only things you want your face from now on they took all the insane Tech they develop with the best athletes and badasses in the world and engineered them into incredible-looking prescription glasses.


They're lighter than anything else out the_re like forget you wearing them light. So they're very comfortable. They don't give you a headache at the end of the day. The Optics are As Good As It Gets crystal clear. No glare super durable materials. You can add blue light blocking Coatings. And again, they have these titanium bendable temples that once you have those you like why don't other one. Why didn't they figure this out? They have different sizes of these little nose pads. So if you have a fat nose or skinny nose, you can still get a perfect fit and what all that means is that they're super fucking comfortable. You actually do shit in them. They don't slip out be just leaning over to pick up your kids or Jim stop kettlebells yoga Sprint's whatever you're into you don't have to compromise or switch into contacts.


It's just because you actually move your body sometimes so if you need glasses or if you just want some blue blocking frames or readers, like I wear you need to check them out. They've got a bunch of classic great-looking Styles and again the best fucking sunglasses on Earth. It's super easy. They'll send you the prescription glasses. They'll send you the glasses at home so you can try them on and see what looks good. And then you send them your prescription and boom you're done super easy and JRE listeners get 20% off with the code Rogan. So go to Roca, that's our okay. A.com and check them out into the code Rogan for 20% off the right here in Austin Texas. Check them out. There. I wear is the shit we're also brought to you by the motherfucking cash app.


That's right folks the number one finance app in the known universe. You probably already know the cash app is the easiest way to spend money between your friends and family without having to hold on to that paper cash that dirty paper but the cash app is also the very best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly which is known in the industry are quotes as stacking SATs SATs stands for Satoshi. Who is this legendary person who created bitcoin who nobody knows who it is like the Banksy of currency Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network.


By its users with no Central Authority when it be awesome if the whole world worked like that. Yeah. Well Bitcoin does start with Bitcoin and of course when you download the cash app and enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word, you will receive ten dollars and the cash app will send ten dollars to our good friend Justin Ren's fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo. We're very honored and proud to be a part of this through this they've built several Wells and the process of building many more and they've raised a shitload of money. We're super happy and Justin ran is probably the nicest human being that's ever lived. So don't forget use the promo code Joe Rogan all one word.


When you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play Store, you get 10 bucks 10 bucks goes to an amazing cause we're also brought to you by stamps.com this holiday season more people will be mailing stuff than ever before and that means the post office is going to be big. Is the you don't have time for that plus this is not a time where you want to be in crowds, right? Well stamps.com bring the post office and now UPS shipping right to your computer. You can mail and Chip anything from the convenience of your home or office with stamps.com anything you can do with the post office you can now do with just a few clicks plus stamps.com saves you money with deep discounts.


You can't even get at the post office and they've been a sponsor of this show since thousand and thirteen that's seven years of awesome service stamps.com brings all the services the amazing Services US Postal Service and UPS right to your computer. You can use stamps.com and a regular computer with a regular printer and by and print official US postage 24/7 for any letter any package any class of mail anywhere you want to send it. Once your mail is ready just schedule a pick up or drop it off. It's that But whether you're a small office sending out invoices and online seller for filling orders during this record-setting holiday season, or even a giant Warehouse sending thousands of packages a day stamps.com can handle it all with ease with stamps.com get five cents off every first class stamp and up to 40% off priority mail and up to 62 percent off UPS shipping rates.


And it's a fraction of the cost was expensive postage meters. It's a no-brainer saves you time and it saves you money. No wonder why over 900,000 small businesses already used stamps.com don't spend a minute of your holiday season at the post office is Here sign up for stamps.com instead. There's no risk with the promo code JRE you get a special offer that includes a four-week trial plus free postage and a digital scale. No long-term commitments or contracts. Just going to stamps.com Click on the microphone at the top of the homepage and type in JRE that stamps.com and enter J R E stamps.com never go to the post office again.


And we're also brought to you by my all-time favorite underwear. I'm wearing them right now the caress my package me undies, they believe that Comfort is about more than what's touching your skin. It's about feeling comfortable. Oil in your skin. Hmm. I don't know what that means but they're the best underwear I've ever worn in my life and they have some awesome prints for holidays like Halloween, which is coming up. They have the spookiest underwear of all. Well, they've launched three new Halloween prints whether you're in a cat's blood or skeletons if you're in a bullet, they probably should have blood underwear. Right? I mean who wrote this anyway, they've got fucking awesome underwear.


It's the softest underwear I've ever worn in my life. It's made from something called micro. Doll irresistibly soft natural fiber source from Beechwood trees. It's not only super soft but breathable light and impossibly cozy. They're the best. There's nothing even close. I'm telling you. That's all I wear. I'm not just saying this if me and he told me to go fuck myself tomorrow like we don't like you retire your voice. I would still wear me undies and I would still buy them the best and they have a great offer for listeners this podcast for any first-time purchases, you get 15% off and and free shipping me and he's also has their problem free philosophy. If you are not satisfied with any product for any reason, they will refund it or exchange it no caveats no questions.


So to get 15% off the best fucking underwear of all time 15% off your first order and free shipping go to me undies.com Rogan. That's me undies.com / Rogan. My guest today is an exceptional human being and hugely accomplished actor. He's an author is new book is called it's called green lights. That was probably believe it's called green lights. It's about green lights clear. We'll find out real quick Matthew McConaughey. Oh I gave up his name. Look at he's awesome. He's just a he's one of those rare people.


That's an actor that I enjoy. Listen. I enjoyed just listening to him talk about life. He's a unique human being. I really love talking to him. And here he is the Great and Powerful Matthew McConaughey. The Joe Rogan Experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Hello, Joe, what's going on, man? You got a book out got a book out called green lights trying to cut this down. What makes a guy who is successful as you as an actor what makes you want to expose more of yourself because that's kind of what you're doing by writing a memoir, right?


You're exposing your thought process your your life your lessons. Another way of communicating. You know, what I do. My day job is an actor. It's got four filters from the raw expression. There's what I have is my rock expression. There is what's being recorded. There's what's being edited and there's what's being put on the screen. I wanted to do something where I got rid of the filters writing a book. There is one filter because it's the written word what you do what we're doing now and Do stand-up. That's no filters. You know, that's the direct its live.


The The Big Show is always recording sort of ultimate goal, but I wanted to I wanted to put it down and say Hey, I want to I'm part of these movies. They usually say written by somebody else directed by somebody else edited by someone else finds for someone. I was like, no I want to go direct my own. I want to produce my own movie without I do that. I want to put the words on the page and I'd been writing for 36 years. So I had a lot of went to go through and see if it was something worthy of sharing. Yes. You've been keeping a journal for 36 years. Yep. What made you start doing that? I think probably the beginning the usual reason someone writes in a journal, you know, well, my heart's broken Gretchen definitely broke that pacific people's on my face.


Why do I only have peach fuzz over my pecker? And everyone else does in my early 20s, I remember I was I was kind of rolling I was in You had a job at money in my pocket at a nice girlfriend making my grades my relationships were good. And I remember going. Oh, you hadn't been writing in your Journal years much notice. You don't do that so much ballet when things are going well, and I said, I think you better start writing down things when things are going well being my gut my idea was that hey, you're going to get in a rut again. You lose your frequency again in life. You might want this to go back and look at to help you recalibrate and that proved to be true.


You know so many times we dissect failure and and hardships highlight, but we don't dissect success and going back in those journals. I found that there are times when I got in a rut later and I was able to go back to those channels and go what were your habits when you were rolling man, who you hanging out with? Where are you going? What were you eating? What were you drinking? How much I'm asleep are you getting? How are you looking at life and they'd help me recalibrate in the times when I was off frequency and get back on the rails again and find my frequency again. What were the things that Things were going great. What was were the common factors? Common factors will one check in with yourself before checking in with the world when you wake up in the morning really the sit there and take a little time read a little something that's between me and me write a little something that's between me and me before picking up the damn phone and saying hey, what are you Mills came in or hopping out in the kitchen and going and everyone else is already have gone.


Hey, hey, what's up? Take? Take take take 10 minutes to check in with me before. We're checking in with the world or the other thing since humor sense of humor. I found that I was laughing more happiest time of my life when I got my wink back man. When I got my wink if I lose my wink. It's like, oh I'm taking things too. Seriously. So I had more of a sense of humor didn't they take things as personal in many ways and wasn't asking permission as much. And I was rolling asking permission. Like what do you mean by that?


Well as ask permission about going to do you know having the confidence to believe in something I want to do and just doing it and saying hey if you ask permission, you're already creating one of those filters away from the rock question just do it. It's like I don't you can what you're saying what it sounds like is like you almost like self-medicated with a type of medication or a type of meditation that you invented yourself. You almost like figured out a meditation because that's what people who meditate that's what they say to do take and you know, x amount of time 1020 whatever it is minutes out of the day focus on your breathing clean the mind out of anxiety and stress and if you do that on a regular basis, you'll have a happier life and you seem to have figured that out on your own or did you read books about doing this?


I think I figured it out on my own. I mean the other thing that I didn't tell you was to In the day before I say my prayers are not to go through the day, which I don't know about you but it can be hard to remember what you had for breakfast after dinner when you're going to bed. It can be hard to remember what those first things we did in the day. So I'll go back through my day when I'm happiest I go back to my day and I like to ride a mental note of what is tomorrow? What are my plans for tomorrow? That's a big stress reliever for me. I'll I think I learned it on my own. Own. I've always been a list keeper. I love making long list of things to do during the day and I had everything that I had the simple things that you know, you're going to do anyway in the list, you know, like it can kiss your wife.


You know what I mean? You drop a deuce whatever it is II right things. I'm going to do just so it's more to mark off the list you write you write down. You have to take a shit like really just remember, you know, enjoy that or read something read something funny or or have a Through that favorite to New Year's something that I know because the longer the list the more things I can mark off that day. The more I feel like I accomplished in the more it makes it kind of easy to do the hard stuff. You know. Yeah, I do that with some things that I have to do like exercise and writing I do that with some things but it seems like you are very meticulous with this. Yeah, I go through hot streaks and cold streaks on it.


You know, I do it more times than others, but I've found that those are the common denominators some of the things I do when I am the most happy. I'm not a big meditate or but my exercise I call breaking a sweat once a day exercising I find for me that is necessary because it puts a demarcation between all of my responsibilities and I could times look up you know how it is if sometimes you go through the day or days and you're so busy, and I'm It on autopilot and getting stuff done but everything had to do stress comes when those responsibilities feel like they're stacked vertically on our shoulders and there's a proverbial weight on her shoulders. When I go break a sweat all of a sudden all those things that were stacked vertically on my shoulders my responsibilities lay down and their laterally out in front of me.


So there's no more weight on my shoulder and I find that I get those things done better and with more enjoyment if I just go. Oh there they are in front of you just handle one then hop to the next one. And all that and off to the next one to handle that and I'll much more better, but I need those icy demarcations between my responsibilities. If I go break a sweat, yeah, I couldn't agree more with that. I think there's a biological need for that when human beings are under pressure because I think the way our bodies are set up pressure historically genetically meant your life was in danger and you had to exert energy and your body stored up this energy you you had Adrenaline Rush as you had anxiety you had all these different physical needs that you had to take care of and if you don't exert energy those physical needs are not met and your body is confused at stores.


A lot of this and you just get anxious you yell at red lights and people just freak out generally the your tolerance for bullshit is way lower. But if you can just get that physical need taken care of you're way better at handling life way better way better. Yeah, I couldn't tell people that enough. I'm a broken record with it. I say it too much and I love hearing people like yourself successful people. All that have thought about a lot of the various aspects of what's good and bad about their life expressed that because I think everyone needs to hear it.


It's just we need to hear it from enough people so that it just get becomes ingrained in everyone's had everyday brush your teeth every day break a sweat. This just couldn't do it. I mean, it's good for so many things. Yeah, you know people talk about oh, you know stress. I'm like well bullshit. Yeah, the stress is part. Means you give a damn, you know what I mean, you're going to have stress you're supposed to have stress, but I know I handled things better and more thoroughly and more like myself. Like I want to the outcomes always better and I enjoy doing it more. If I do go break that sweat and get those endorphins going and that presses reset for me and getting shows me a little it separates all the events.


Like I said laterally and they don't feel like they're stacked up on top of me. Yeah. Also sleep salir me how much you get a night nine and a half. Woohoo, I love it. That's great. I wish I could do that goddamn when I get a nine and a half ounce an hour night. Oh my god, it feels so good the next day. I feel amazing. If I got a newer person. Well my I'm lucky. I have a wife that says no no you get you on a half. I'll get my seven because I'd rather handle the stuff. I handle that. You don't while you're sleeping be around you when you hadn't had enough sleep. Well, you set it up, right? Yeah. I can't.


That enough to sleep is everything sleep exercise Health keep the body functioning correctly all those things. They they're not just it's not a vanity thing and it's not a laziness thing. It's literally like the it improves the quality of the way the Mind functions and you get better things done. You're the quality of your work will be better. Definitely think more clearly you don't waste your time chasing down bullshit. You don't you know, you do the right kind of work, you know, we all know that I love hard work, but I've got many times in my life where I'm doing the wrong kind of work. I love the kind of work where I've accomplished what I need to do during the day and I lay my head on the pillow and I'm exhausted because I got done what I needed to get done as best.


I could I do not like the exhaustion at the end of the day where I'm like man, I feel like I was just going to Revolutions man. I don't know if today had any attention to it. In build anything and today was a good I don't know if I eat maybe I went backwards, you know, I don't like that kind of exhaustion and that's the kind of exhausted. Actually. I don't go to sleep. Well, I actually keeps me up the only thing I get good out of those shitty days as a desired never have those shitty days again. I think that the good the good aspects of negative feelings is recognizing how good positive feelings are how good are the feelings of accomplishment are by failing and that's why we are talking about you know, like heh, no stress just live in peace.


That's a crock of shit. That's like never feel bad. Well, then you never gonna appreciate feeling good like yeah, I'm gonna and valleys. I'm I'm I'm with you a hundred percent on that. I mean I write my book, you know, and I get asked a lot to do believe in fear. I'm like well hell, yeah fuck doesn't believe in fear. We know you see those look no fear. Those people are so silly like no. No, I do it anyway. D do you fear us I fear every single day it's the overcoming of the fear or I know being raised. You know, we were a physical discipline family. We got that. We got the belt we didn't get grounded. My parents The Motto was we're not going to grind because that takes away your time.


And your time is your most valuable thing. Now, we never got injured. We just get heard the time you cried it was over with but there were things that I did not do growing up and still do not do For fear of the consequences that your work for me gone. I retired things. I did not do grown up going like no, that'd be a lot of fun but not so much not more fun than how much it's going to suck. If I get caught physical consequences are it's a very controversial subject because a lot of people think I don't hit my kids but a lot of people that I know who are my age were hit when they were young and they look back on it and they say, you know, What I learned from that in my parents didn't they didn't beat me.


They physically punished me for something that I did wrong and they didn't do it to be sadistic. They did it because they cared about me and that's how they were raised. It's a very controversial subject because people get up in arms with the idea of hitting children, you know, so you can you bring it up of that that it was beneficial to you is going to have a lot of people's hackles raised sure and I get asked all the time in I've shared it openly how I was raised and what kind of corporal punishment we got. I don't choose to discipline my children the same way my parents did but I've said this before I wouldn't trade one single of those ass-whuppings. I got for the values that were instilled in me from getting them and I'm very clear and was at the time that I earned every one I got and everyone and we were family, you know, my parents are like we get it.


With an overtake it and it's over and we don't hold grudges. No one's going to speak of it again. And if you got in trouble that was the night that would take us across town to our favorite burger joint and let us stay up as late as we wanted. It was it was over you got more trouble if you brought something back up, you know to somebody in the family. Yeah, but what about when you do that? No, no, they already got in trouble for that. You don't bring it back up. You could not go to sleep in our family holding a grudge. My parents would stay up all night and let you miss school to sit there and keep hashing out and Until we could hug it out cry it out and say I love you and move on sounds like a wise family. I mean, it's a controversial thing to say if they hit you with.


A lot of people would say there's other ways to do it. But the way they made you hug it out and stay up all night and communicate. It sounds very wise. I think it was you know, I don't you know, like I said, I don't choose to discipline. My kids way my parents discipline me but I damn sure don't judge them or say what they did was wrong key from a different era as well. Right? I'm David are yeah, that's a thing that is very difficult for people to come to grips with is that you know human beings that were raised Thirty forty fifty sixty years ago. They it was a different world. It just was different and we know more Now and like you're saying you do not choose to discipline your children that way but it was so common back then.


It was yeah, I mean if it was, you know, my parents were probably thought they were taking it easy on their boys more than their parents treated them. Yeah, they probably had it much more harsh. Yeah, you know and it's a it's a like I said, I'd there are things I did not do that. I should not have done for fear getting my backside. So here their value in that in that fear and consequences and consequences go both ways, you know, there's good ones in the matters of consequence for everything we do with Were definitely things I didn't do that. I should not have done for the fear of the consequences that were useful to me. Is this the writing of this book is some of it almost like like letters to your younger self like a lesson to people who are like you coming out because one of the things that's so beneficial to young people with reading autobiographies and Memoirs of successful people live extraordinary lives is you get to see all the thought process you get to see the warts the failures the the whole thing the fears the anxieties you get to see it all so you hook oh that Matthew McConaughey guy.


He's a normal Dude, he's not just the guy from Dallas Buyers Club and all these movies. He's a normal human being and maybe I can one day achieve Heights like him as well. Or maybe I read this book and I'm someone who feels like, you know as we often do and we're going through a crisis that we're the only ones and it's only happened to me. I'm the center of the universe. No one else will understand and you can go. Well, here's a guy who's successful who shoot. I haven't maybe thought he just kind of rolls out of bed and makes everything look easy, which you found out I try to work to get to that point, but maybe you look and you hear and you got oh, he went through some similar things.


I share some stories in here that are very subjective to me. But the more subjective and personal I got the more I found that oh, these are more relatable to the more amount of people out there. So you may read a story and go I have that story a similar story of my life. Well, here's how McConaughey handled it or wished. He would have handled it or here's some help you got a long way here somewhere where he's he took a walk about with himself and found out some things about himself. Maybe that's something I could do for myself. So there are some tools in the book for someone to see themselves in and help navigate our way out of a crisis. It's red and yellow lights, but also how to navigate things when we are catching green lights because I have a chapter called The Art of running downhill, you know, I sell so I've self sabotage myself and things are going to well before until I learned that that really wasn't my right to put a roof over my expectations for myself and who the hell that I think I was well, that's more common than not isn't it?


There's the people get what they call was impostor syndrome, you know, it's you don't feel like you deserve Of all the good things that are happening to you and it just seems odd. You see it happen to other people that almost makes sense. You see other people being very successful it your detached, but when it's happening to you, it's almost like this this is uncomfortable because this is not normal and so I'm going to fuck this up so that I feel like I used to feel before which at least even if it was failure. It's comfortable. I'm accustomed to it and it's resistance. Yea, you know it look and I I think there's very healthy ways to create resistance in our lives when we are on so-called Easy Street.


Yeah, that may be a challenge in ourselves in the right way, you know that we need to create resistant to overcome it to feel most alive, but there's also foolish times to refer to create resistance and the fact that that is things are going so, well, you think that's how it's going to be for the rest your life. No, trust me the uphills coming the dram the real dramas coming don't create any false drama in front of you right now because you can't patronising yourself the real drama. Going to come someone is going to get sick. You are going to get hurt something will happen in your life. The world will do unto you you'll do it on yourself. So don't trip yourself running downhill and faceplant and break your frickin nose, just because you needed some resistance running downhill. Yeah, because that I feel is coming. You know, I mean but to go back to the first part of that I'm a big fan of creating resistance to keep myself in check and make sure that I'm feeling most alive to overcome the right things in my life.


Yeah me as well. Well, I I find physical resistance has the best thing to calm my mind and to provide physical challenges that allow me to it allows me to deal with success easier because there's bullshit that I have to deal with but the bullshit is physical and it is sometimes as challenging mentally to do, you know, like very physically exerting exercises or particularly Jiu-Jitsu or martial arts because it just breaks you down and so that the other stuff That's sort of it seems like it should be complicated but it's not you don't know why you don't sweat it as much weight. It is sober you up.


Yes a very literal way and in the same way. It's a daily routine to so be yourself up to throw off them and acid mendacious bullshit and your life that you were so concerned about and get down to what really needs to happen mountains become molehills, you know, it's, you know, big moments in our life sobers up to I know my father moving on and passing on from this life. Sobered me up in a way that I then stepped up and said, oh you don't have your dad to rely on anymore to catch you when you fall all these things. He's been teaching you that you've been kind of making be B minuses in life. Now, you better start making eggs out of me because he's not there so you better take some ownership and I remember when he moved on I carved this in a tree he less impressed more involved and what it was as soon as he passed away.


I noticed that all the things that I was In life mortally like the same people that have success money. They lower down to eye level. Things that I was looking up at and all the things that I was patronising and condescending and no no sloughing off. That's not worthy of me. They rose up to high level and I remember saying Boy The World is Flat. I'm looking it in the eye. I see further. I see wider see clearer. I got to take ownership of myself and I still with my heart heart. I still have my head higher and I walk forward and started doing things and that way they'll stay in Earth without asking so much permission all the time and got a lot more done it became a lot more myself and More satisfaction.


Yeah, sometimes people do need some wake up call to let you know that this is a temporary existence and make the best out of it and enjoy it and sometimes it doesn't happen. Unless something tragic happens like they are in a terrible way, but also a beautiful way there's a lot of power and tragedy because you get something on the other end of it and you get clarity. We will get some clarity out of this tragic an awkward time of covid. Yes. There are lessons. We're learning that we didn't even know what they are right now that when we get out of it will inherently be part of our being that will go for it. I sure as hell hope so but you know us humans were quick to snap right back to how we were before.


My concern is that it state is happening so fast, but it's going to take a long time to sort of even out and for us to reach equilibrium. That's what I'm worried about with this weight that what's happening. So deterioration that you know, the financial deterioration the fear the changes with the masks and the social distancing and everything is happening so fast, I'm worried. It's just going to take a long time for people feel comfortable again. Oh, yeah, I mean look I think for for millions of people. Yeah, this is the new normal. I think I don't think we're ever really going back to how it was.


I mean, this is a year that agree or disagree with how we've gone about it and how things have been politicized here. And there this is year that have shaken our floor. I don't believe this is ever this year is going to be on page 14 of the news for quite some time. I think we got a lot of rebuilding to do in the law. Term, it may be a 20 year built. Yeah, I know. I agree. It's a it's just strange. It's just feels strange you go outside the world just feels different than it felt a year ago. And that's that phrase the new normal that people like to bring up and this is this is where we find ourselves but I along with you. I'm I'm almost always optimistic and I have a lot of faith in human beings and I think that we can get through this and and have a very valuable lesson about when things do happen that are positive and good.


Maybe we won't take it for granted as much as we did before because we never thought that something like this was ever going to come along where the whole world is going to shut down for seven eight. Nine ten. Who knows how many months? Yeah forced winter. Yeah. We had forced Upon Us in something that we don't take enough time to force upon ourselves and choose upon ourselves to do you talk about optimism, which I'd love to open that up with you and faith in mankind and I was asked the other day about how do I trust? Just in this is a time in the world with his great distrust and people don't believe you don't just trust you. Don't you don't trust others you end up not trust yourself excetera that reciprocity go back and forth, and then everyone's walking in circles, but My answer and I never thought about it until this guy asked me so I was like well like I'm talking to you right now Joe I give you you have 100% of my trust until you don't I'm not coming in hedge in my bed with you or anyone that I meet for the first time.


I'm not coming in like well, you're gonna have to really earn your trust with me. I'm looking out for you know, you have a hundred percent. You may ask me some questions right now that I'm like going I think he's getting it something else. That's not really in my best interest and maybe then you start losing so much rust, but as a Now we meet you have a hundred percent until it starts to decrease and that's all that's up to you. I try to go towards everybody like that first. So how is that in let's talk about optimism because there's foolish optimism, there's like and I don't think what you and I are saying is hey, Glass half full always see it half full. No, let's recognize that it's half empty.


That's the inevitable part. It's half empty or half full now. What's the constructive way forward? What can you do something with the the half a glass of got nothing in it or half it's got something in it. Well, I think what I can do is with the half. It's got something in it makes something to irrigate some create more water so I can fill it up. I mean, it's choosing where can we be constructive and in the a choose the affirmative and that's not a foolish optimism because it's a lot Injecting certain optimism Hallmark card optimism's can almost deny that there was the other half of glass that was empty or deny the problem and I'm not into I'm not really a purchaser of denying where there's a problem. You've got You've Got What I Call whiskey philosopher wisdom Like if you and I were having a couple of drinks at the bar, I have a feeling you would say some cool shit that I would remember and I would take home when I go my be like lying in bed going down like so I'm gonna remember that that makes a lot of sense.


Where did you get that from? I think I mean I grew up in a family of storytellers. I love Couric's I love bumper stickers. I love slogans. I love to deconstruct a big conversation down to what's a one-liner What's the title of that? Song we just sang What's the title of this? You know this hour or whatever you and I talked What's the title of a relationship? I had what's the you get enough of those things? What's the album title as I think of things? Lyrically? And I think that may be where it comes from as I think in a musical in a musical way. Is this something you've acquired. Is this something you always had you just sort of slowly developed it.


I think I'm guessing it was slowly developed. I mean again I come from a from a family of storytellers where we sat around the table and told stories and if you didn't tell your story good somebody else the table took it over and you better be telling a good story and not dragging on or lose your train of thought because somebody else will step in and roll over you. So when you want to get a word in you better be a good Storyteller, what is that how you got into acting like this the ability to entertain because the Storyteller is essentially an Entertainer sure. Well, I To film school first and because when I look back at the Diaries, I really couldn't admit that. I wanted to be in front of the camera as an actor, but that's what I really wanted to do, but I went to film school because I felt like being a Storyteller behind the camera was something that my dad one could digest as a possible route forward for his son and it was all that I could digest at the time.


So when I made the leap to film school, I immediately would direct actors by performing myself. In front of the camera. So I really liked the the first person subjective performance and then I got that job and that summer of 92 on dazed confused or I ended up three lines turned into three weeks work. I'm getting paid three hundred twenty bucks a day people tell me I'm good at it. I keep get invited back to said I'm like is this one can legal it? So I went back graduated picked up my packed up my U-Haul and drove West young man, you know two weeks out of out of graduating college and You know, I didn't have that story.


Of roughing it. When I first got out their first two auditions, I went on I got the job. That's pretty fucking amazing. Yeah. Did you when you when you say that you didn't want to admit that you wanted to be in front of the camera. Like what do you think was holding you back? I think it was the eye. Look. I was raised in a blue-collar family where you get a job. You work your way up the ladder company ladder to be in the Arts to be in front of camera the actor sounding So Vain Simon so avant-garde sounded so In Sun is so so so nothing stable about it and sort of bring that up to my dad even bring it up. My like I said I could it was not even in the vernacular of my dreams.


I did not even dream about the only place that I admitted it was in my Diaries and I found those where I wrote to myself before I could even consciously admit it, but I did want to be an actor all the way back since 1988, but I never admitted it until I started doing it and And it would turn in about 1993 that I was like, okay, I think I can do this. I'm giving it a shot and I love this. It's totally understandable that would fall into some form of self-sabotage. If it came that easy. If all of a sudden you're on Dazed and Confused all of a sudden you do your first two auditions, you get the gig everything's rolling.


You're young and handsome. Whoo. Come on Dre night. I mean, how did you yourself? Correct? They let it did. I I got it really happened around 96 after I did a film with time to kill. I remember the Friday before time to kill open. That's the movie that that I was the lead in a big budget John Grisham movie. That was the one that made me famous. Alright, so the Friday before that movie opened I know there's a hundred scripts I wanted to do I would have done anything to do any of these scripts 99 know you can't one. Yes, you can I'm walking down the Third Street Promenade in Santa Monica 400 people on the Promenade 396 mine own business for from checking me out two girls have thought I was cute and a couple other people maybe like my shoes.


the Monday following that weekend time to go opens at night the Monday following All of a sudden out of those hundred scripts 99 yeses, you can do any of these Matthew one know all of a sudden that same Promenade walk. I took 400 people now 396 were staring at me and for people weren't one of them was blind I say it was get inverted the world became a mirror. I noticed ho shit. I don't need any strangers anymore. People are coming up to me going like I'm so sorry about Miss HUD and I'm not going. Wait a minute number one. What's your name? I've never met you had you know, I had a dog whose name is Miss, huh? It has cancer you just skipped five filters of Howdy You know what? I mean?


And I remember feeling them balanced about it. How long was that? I'm 23 at that time. I'm being told. I love you. I love you. And in my mind, I'm going man. We don't throw that word around. I've said that to four people in my life. So I want to know what the heck was real what really mattered and I was looking for a place to go. I need to get out I needed to go those demarcations. We talked about earlier. I needed to go break a long sweat. I need to go. I let memory ketchup see what the hell was real. What was not so I packed up my stuff went to a monastery for about a week and then I got back and I went off I had this certain dream ever repeating dream that came to me and I went to Peru and flood the Amazon for 22 days and it was a force Sal.


To nobody there knew my name. They didn't speak English. I was forced to be with myself and my thoughts and my own company, which I was not enjoying. So after about 12 days of shaking the monkeys off my back figuring out what the hell is going to forgive myself for and what I was going to lay down the hammer and say enough's enough about I came out of it woke up one morning light as a feather and shook hands with myself and said we're going to be all right, man. You're the one person. I can't get rid of McConaughey. So we might as well get along and re-entered and that vibration helped a lot to disseminate through all the bullshit and all the excess of affluence that was coming at me at the time and I found some discernment and I found some discrimination in my choices again and moved on from there.


But I've had to do that I've had to take off of my own many times to go recalibrate that sounds like a story of a man running and the Rocks fall right behind them. Like you just missed it. Like also 23 years old you weren't a child star. But it was damn close like we all know what happens when your personality develops in the spotlight and you're famous almost no one gets out alive. I mean and I understand it. I I wasn't ready to go out to Hollywood before I did Hollywood's not a place to go find yourself always a place where you can be anything you want. It's infinit.


Yes is well in the infinite. Yes is as you know, the old the infinite options can make a tire. Don't have any of us. What is that noise that keeps going off? Is that on your end? That's on my end what him is if these emails coming in the crazy ding ding sign it. Is that what you get when you get emails that wasn't what I the fuck out of me. Let's just do nothing nothing. I don't I checked them once a day. Oh see, I don't text. You know, I don't tell like the email more than text because I can press talking flag an email. I can't flag a text. I was textured allow me to flagon. Oh, I'm going to save that answered later.


And if I would just do text, I mean Forget You Road and then two weeks later go. I never wrote him back right? I do that. Where's my delirium doesn't go ding. This I don't know. I may be Jodie Foster made it out alive. She might be the only time you worked with her did she nor did she make it out alive of being a child Fame and she made it out alive. You know, she was yes she was but she the Coppertone girl on the beach. She was a precious things. She she wasn't Incheon Taxi Driver. Yeah. I mean man. She did you know, who else did Ron Howard? Yes, he did. He's a very nice guy I ran into him at a Doctor's office.


He couldn't have been nicer and more normal and really enjoyed talking to him. Yeah solid, you know, but I don't know. I've never talked to them about how they navigated in their youth they obviously had some support because you know, I see the I see parents with their with their children and they want them to be in for the camera and I've even seen some set that we work with and the mothers behind the camera like Olin Mills photography going cheese. Cheese say cheese and the director you go. No, this is not all in Mills. We just want the child to be himself or herself. If they have it comes to be themselves in front camera.


Don't be acting like anything. This is not a Olin Mills photo shoot and so a lot of times I've seen the parents. They're the ones that actually need the recalibration. Yeah to go. Whoa, don't be making your child doesn't know who he or she is yet and yet Forcing them to try and be someone else and that's their reality. There's danger in that. Yeah. Sure. No, the really is. It's very unfortunate. When you see that you've worked with kids that have had to play your kid like is that is that feel conflicted to you? When that happens? Like you almost like don't want them to do it?


No II best been some of my most comfortable Rose is playing a father or a father figure and I think it's because was the one thing I always knew I wanted to be in life as a father. I knew that since I was 8 years old what I mean is for the children themselves, like do you feel weird for them? No, no the kids that are playing you your child, like knowing that they're going to be in a film at a really young age. They get experience all this. I mean, I'll check in with you know, again, what I've noticed is it's the parent that may need the recalibration the kids just fine. But then you see the mother or the father loving it more than they're loving it or loving that child is from the camera.


We're gonna say well, you know, when I can I've tried to talk about are your values in line here because your son or daughter's future and who they are is depending on how you deal with it. I've also seen parents handle it really really well. All you're going you're going to work you have a job to do if you have a down to do that, but you still come home and you still do the chores and you're still my son or my daughter who acts just like you do and we don't do any of that other that BS you're not things aren't getting around here and you don't want to steal I wouldn't want wouldn't want my child to be raised in Hollywood by Hollywood. I now I you know early in my career.


I was like, no, I would never want my kids if I have them doing what I do. Do I've completely turned a 180 on that I would love if my kids got into the industry that I'm in. It's been great to me. I met some of the most creative awesome people in my life, but there's a time I wouldn't want them to go find out who they are in a Hollywood in the Hollywood Game by being an actor or that kind of story to tell your own. I want to know their own story first before they're going to go tell someone else's story. Yeah. I've likened it to like almost like a chemical process like if you want to make epoxy you have to A bunch of different ingredients and if you don't add the ingredients while you're mixing it up, it'll never be sure. It'll never really firm up.


It'll never be complete and I feel like that's one of the things that happens to a lot of child actors like the experience of people not knowing who you are. You have to earn their respect. You have to earn their love earn their friendship prove yourself not have people loved you before you even meet them. That's just it seems toxic for children it just He's crazy. I think it is highly toxic. Yeah, you know, we started off the conversation on this topic 2 minutes ago. Not many of recovered. No no money from that being security the lack of known who they are the lack of talk about resistance, you know Hollywood to place of yes.


Yes, of course you can be whatever you want. It's Halloween every day. Hmm now wait a minute. If you're playing dress up every day and you have the option to be whoever the heck you want. And you know, you want to go to the club all night. Did I to everything's a yes in those infinite? Yes is you can get lost and not found. Yeah, I think they you know, you got to have some structure and like I said, I went out at 22 23, I don't think I was ready to go out there before I went out there because I had a cent if I didn't as much as I had a sense of who I was I had a very clear sense of who I was not. And that helped me because I was able to see some things and be invited to some things to be around someplace. So I was like, you know what this is a stop not a stay for me this evening early going to feed me and really turn me on.


This is a short-term, you know something I'm getting that's feed me in the short term but this isn't going to last is it really who I am? Yeah. I've talked to a few child stars that sort of got like Miley Cyrus is one that I talked to recently and you know, you see it in the And what she's describing what it was like to grow up famous and it's a very difficult path and I don't you know, I think Jodie Foster Ron Howard is a few that have gotten through it so much to actually sit down with those folks and try to figure out what the common denominator like, how did they do it science that be some great times of how they did it. You know, I story about had a teaching tool that has to do with something.


I'm II pulled off in Hollywood for my kids and I'm big on delayed gratification. And you know after I won the Oscar for best actor, my kids are like what you get the trophy for I said, will you remember a year and a half ago? We're in New Orleans Popeye would go away you wake up in the morning. I was already at work and I'd come home and have dinner with you all and Tucky in and you wake up the next morning. I was gone again and member you said I look like a giraffe because I was so skinny. And I yeah and I go well what I was doing for those 30 days When I was gone all day a year and a half later.


Somebody said deem that excellent work and they gave me a trophy for that work what I did a year and a half ago. And I remember I saw him click they were like, oh, oh our future is a compounding interest. You don't I mean we had asked it. Oh there you can build you can't do something today and get rewarded tomorrow and it was it was an example that worked for them. Understanding, you know that you can that you can get you can invest and make choices to engineer more Roi and now I know that was a milestone for you and obviously you won the Oscar for it, but there's something about these physical transformation roles.


When an actor does something where you realize like, they're literally torturing themselves. I mean when you would how would it get down to how much did you weigh? I weighed 135 and look, you know this I was not torturing myself. I was a militant the hardest part was making the damn choice. It was my responsibility. If I look like I do now playing Ron Woodroof in Dallas Buyers Club, you are out of the movie the first frame all bullshit. He doesn't he's not stage for HIV amount. What's my job? I had to lose the weight. Once I made my mind up. I did the smart thing. I gave myself five months. I got on a diet where I'd have my tapioca pudding or whatever 3 eggs in the egg whites in the morning five ounces of fish cup of vegetables for lunch 5-ounce Fisk of a vegetables for dinner as much wine as I wanted to drink and I lost two point five pounds a week like clockwork.


Or no exercise as much wine as you wanted a drink much as a one. How do they what kind of diet is this it work too quickly and it didn't matter if I was going to the treadmill and burning 2,000 calories a day or not two point five pounds a week Clockwork. And what happened during that time. This is another reason that I really didn't torture myself and people say, oh my gosh has been so hard. I like know what I learned from it that the body is more resilient than we give it credit for I The power I lost in the neck down equally or more so sublimated to the neck up. I was so my mental game was so acute and so on point I was clinically smart.


It didn't matter if I drink my wine to warn the morning at 4:30 a.m. No alarm clock thing. I was up every morning had incredible amount of mental energy. I had no leverage from my neck down being my knees. I had no insulation. Anyway, you know, my body would hurt when I I run 10 feet, but from here up. There's some things actually miss about it. What do you think? What was the process? Like? Why did your brain work better when you're starving yourself? I think because it wasn't relying on I think on a cellular level I felt my body going. Hey, these are baseball term. You got people over there on the bench in The Dugout.


Then you got people out in the field that are you know, sitting in the in the bullpen not working out on a cellular level. Cellularly my sales Endeavor in The Dugout and over there in the bullpen had to get up and go. Whoa, we're not getting fed up. We used to get fed. We gotta we gotta exercise here. We got to come to hut hut because the my body's not getting we're not getting what we used to get. We're not placated by what we used to get our installations gone are our what we rely on is going what we used to rely on is gone. So I think my whole body woke And my brain got really super super sharp on that as well.


So I think it was the going without the there's a bit of a it was what I went without that sharpened up and made my brain on a cellular level much more hungry. What do you weigh normally? 188 Jesus Christ, so you lost 50 pounds. Yeah, there's roles were guys do this where it defines their career in some like Robert De Niro when he gained weight for Raging Bull Christian Bale when he did The Machinist. Yeah. Yeah. There's these roles where a guy or a woman just transferred Charlize Theron, which she played monster think they transform their body and it's like it's a different level.


Of commitment When you entered into that film that was this the first time he'd ever had to do that. Yeah, first time I've had to do it mean you got Jack for that. Why don't know how Jack do you were before for that Dragon movie? I'm sorry. I forget the name rain of fire rating. If I fucking love that movie. I was great baby Vans and God Miss Van Zant was a great movie. Talk about a guy who's about no bullshit. Well, that was a sobering character. I miss that guy. Yeah, it was a fun character, but you were jacked in that. We jack normally or did you have to get Jack for that movie? I got more Jack for that logo on our family. My dad we come from our anatomy McConaughey's have big tricep.


My dad. You see you'll love this. I'd be sitting there as a kid and my dad was a big guy 64 to 65, you know play Kentucky in a Bear Bryant got drafted by the Green Bay Packers. He was a big bear of a man. He comes in the living room one night and I'm from the TV watching my favorite show Incredible Hulk. There's the correct and I'm like Stand in front of the TV doing all this he goes War. What you doing? I was like Dad look at him and I mean he's got these baseball-sized biceps. Look at him. Wow, and he goes, uh-huh. He takes off his shirt. Because let me tell you something son because that right there pull advisor because that's nice makes a girl scream. You know, it's for show he goes that right.


There. He goes That's the work muscle. That's the one that puts a roof over our head. That's for dough. She'll end of the tie separates from for dough. So I had big triceps. So when I went work done if I take a little bit of creatine my triceps go bananas. So that was a minor transformation. It wasn't that difficult to do. No I did it was minor as a lot of boxing and and and just some nice, you know throwing some weight around these got fit. But for Dallas Buyers Club, yeah. Well, I shut and stay within 10 pounds of striking way to whatever I need to do for the role.


Was it hard to make the decision to do that for Dallas Buyers Club though because that was a giant transformation. I mean It wasn't hard. I was looking for something to be all consumed with something to be obsessed with a singular Obsession. Yo, this is my job. So my life revolved around that my wife made me meals trust me. I didn't go to Pizza Hut and say no. Thank you the pizza. I'll have a salad. I did not premium put myself in front of Temptations ice. I was a Hermit I stayed in my my wife made me the meals and and I studied and wrote and created the character all day long and I Never got tired of that. So my world was I was in a bubble.


I just put myself in a bubble for five and a half months and that commitment to put myself on that island to know that this is it's good to have the singular Obsession you you cannot go far enough McConaughey. That was there's a freedom in that there's a freedom. I've always found a being having having a character that can commit that much to you cannot go far enough though. That was their thought process. Yeah, I knew when I got down to 135. I was like, oh, okay. That's good and mind you will tell you this when I started to eat more at 135 to say let's slow this train down and quit losing weight. My body had already got the message and had its blinders on that. We're going south and it kept going south.


So that was a bit scary because I kept losing the way because my body had gotten already gotten in the in the rhythm of losing weight. And like I said, it turned a blind eye on getting any more food. So there was a tough transition there for about two weeks to get my weight, too. It's out again and say let's just hold 135. So you drop below 135 at one point in time. Just went below 135 got down about 132 and then brought it back up. Now how long did it take for you to physically recover from something like that way back to normal and I'm still recovering really because I thought that I thought that when I saw you in that film I told my wife remember saying this like this is going to take a long time for him to bounce back because I know how hard it is for guys to cut weight for fights and I know a lot of guys that have really depleted their body doing that and when I saw you that gaunt and skinny and like he's eating his body your body ate itself.


Mus?e this is the only way yeah, I look I came back and I did True Detective after that and I got on True Detective. I got to about 167 and held and I love that weight as well because I had a little more leverage at a little more athletic ability. I love more insulation around my joints, but I was still pretty stripped and ripped slowly coming back from that. I did learn this. I had to come back very slowly because I had heard stories about people that go well now I'm back now I'm going to gain weight. I can eat as much as I want. And that you can you can grow back and look deformed you can your features can come back if you rush it. They can come back in odd ways. So I very slowly put the weight back on.


I then did a roll few years ago. I guess there's about four three three years after the house by myself where I put on 47 pounds. So I was 220. What was that? What the hell a lot more gold is called gold is a hell of a lot more fun to put that weight on and to take it off where I was just cheese Burger King. And my family loved me in that role because I was Captain fun. I was yes to everything milk shake for breakfast. You got it. Lets go now that was I've never talked about at that time. I was still mentally sharp not as sharp as I was when I was down at 135, but at 220 libido was through the roof.


I couldn't I couldn't catch a cold if I swam in the damn canals of Amsterdam man. I was like the Abominable Snowman I was insulated. Had great energy during that time my coming back from that. I still got a couple things on my back here around the way so I'm like, where'd that come by that came up with that role in the gold and what's that still doing hanging around, you know, so I did have to come back slowly but I will say this, you know 188 Since then that's my fighting weight before I look a little different than the 188 before then before Dallas Buyers Club.


It's a different 188. So it did take a physical toll sure I would say, you know, even you know, neck and things like that, you know neck and Bone structures the same but we're and that but within how much of this is just getting older too and having less fat cells, right? I'm not sure. But yeah, it didn't hurt. Like I said, I think I stretched my body. I noticed when you know when I got down to that weight at 135 if I was, you know, try to Sprint 10 yards and I just found these would Buckle I had no insulation. I means her. Yeah, I watched it again recently just to kind of get it into my head and that's what I was thinking like this is gonna take a while to bounce back from like I almost forgot how gaunt you got it was it was striking, you know, and that's it fucking crazy commitment man.


You drinking moonshine. What are you doing there? What is that some kombucha? It was you not me neither that a whiskey if two hours. Okay. Yeah your kombucha guy. Hmm. I love that stuff daily. I do too. Yeah, that'll that's great for the immune system. When you look at a roll like a role like Dallas Buyers Club or something like that. Like what makes you choose a role does it just have to resonate with you is it who's involved who the directors are the producers the the other actors that are committed to it? Like what makes you decide? This is Interstellar, let's do it.


All right. Well first what's the pedigree of the people around me the director script? The producers are are are they excellent? Are they the right for the story? I do look at that the main thing I look at is like This character the last 12 years. I've been able to choose characters that that made me Shake in my boots the right way. You know that good kind of scared where you're like, well, I don't know what the hell I'm going to do with this but I can't wait to find out I like characters where the decisions are really going to cost them. Whether it's consequences with every single scene that they're in and the favorite consequences to have or something like a ROM.


Look it's life or death consequences something like a And then how can I remain from getting becoming extinct? You know, those are great. Okay, we brought it down to the bare necessities how to survive or how to stay alive from that place. Then I can then I can give my all that choosing roles where I'm not going to have any compression from the ceiling to the basement of the emotions. I want to give a no one's going to tell me. Oh, you can't be that angry. Oh, no one's going to tell me you can't be that sad. You can't cry. That hard. No, no. Going to tell me you can't last that hard. No one's going to tell me you can't hurt that bad. I don't like to be too. I've been enjoying choosing roles that have a really high ceiling and a limitless ceiling in the limit in this Bates basement to where I'm at so you can go as deep or as high as I want to with them.


There's a lot of roles that have done in my career. For instance like with romantic comedies where those emotions are compressed for a reason this healing you can't laugh that loud. You can't love that hard. You can't get that pissed off. You'll sink the ship of those movies. I think that I built for buoyancy. I've been enjoying the dramatic roles and that's what I love about drama. Is that know it's to the individual actor your ceiling of how much you want to love or your basement of how much you want to hate go for it. There is no there's no limit on either one of those that's the kind of role that really has been turning me on and that makes me feel like I'm having an experience in the making of the movie in the architecture of the character rather than just going and doing a job.


I'm getting a paycheck during the quarantine the lockdown my family and I had movie night basically every night, especially when the kids were doing Zoom classes because you know just it was we had to do something different so we mix it up and we watch contact again and I haven't seen contact in forever. And first of all, God. Damn, what a good movie. That was good movie. That's a good movie and a great movie about aliens like Like a movie that it gives you a different perspective on the possibilities of contact and just the fact that it was a Carl Sagan book and there's just so much good to it that character that you played was a as a fascinating guy and I kind of feel like there's some of you in that guy.


Sure. I mean you are you are my wrong here. You are religious in some way. Yeah, absolutely, and I want to I want to bring this up in this day and age when people go no, I'm not religious. I'm only spiritual. you know, the Latin root of religion is re lagari and lagar a means to bind together re means again. Well in a world that's saying I'm mowing the spiritual because I want Unity. That's exactly what religion means we bastardized the meaning of it over time and we've excluded people and we've corporatize it such but yes, I am religious that character, you know, I had written stories.


I've written a college people come John Wayne Goes West and it was about how do you how do you how can you be a believer? In a world of science and I remember writing things like injuring the make of that movie like science is the Practical Pursuit Of God, the two are not exclusive the they dance together there. They go together belief in science and I never saw those as contradictions and that's part of what the reason I attacked that role and became part of that that movie I wanted to play a person that had that point of view of a believer in a world of Science cannot at the exclusion of Science and not at the exclusion of belief.


Yeah. It's a confusing role for a lot of people if someone is a Believer and also a proponent of science because they want to know what are you literal beliefs? Like the are you taking the Bible at its literal word or do you use it as some sort of a guidebook of the experiences of these people that lived thousands of years ago? Oh that have been translated from multiple different languages back to English and is their wisdom in those translations is their wisdom in those original thoughts these thousands of years of people contemplating and and mulling on these things and that so many have used these as a scaffolding for morals and ethics and for societies.


Yep. This is Vengeance. It's mean you know for people that go. Oh it's a it's a circus book or people had non-believers and I'm like was still the best one going. There's a lot of great truths that come out of the Bible and it is open for a lot of people that has been interpreted and reinterpreted. It has been translated has been handed down. I for myself. I don't know what to do in my daily life with Burning bush. I don't know what to do with that. I do know what to do with love you maybe like yourself. I dunno what to do with Matthew 6:20 to if they eye be single thy whole body will be full of light.


I do know what to do with some Proverbs that I can take into daily practice and go. Oh, I felt my life. I felt Improvement. I felt success in my relationships and my relationship with the day with my career by following that by treating others how I Wanted to be treated the Golden Rule. So I take the Practical stuff myself and try to try to utilize it and pick out what can work for me. When you say when you say you don't know what to do with the burning bush. Like what do you mean by that? I don't know what to do on a daily basis with the teaching of and then he you know, and he showed up as a as a burning bush or the magic tricks and I don't know what to do with Jesus healed everyone that it and he couldn't walk and night that's when he can walk.


I don't know what to do with that. I don't I don't know how to take that into my life and go. Oh there's something useful and practical and healthy for you Matthew that you can practice their so the magic that leans in towards you know, what? Call now more fancy. I don't know what to do with that. I there's philosophies there's Proverbs and there's teachings that I think are very valid and very helpful that we could all be reminded of that are in the Bible that I do find quite useful. Yeah, I think it's almost impossible to figure out what they were trying to say with a lot of the things it's why it's so it's open to interpretation but also open to manipulation and that's where people have a real problem with it when it's used for two separate.


A people to exclude people to marginalize people to judge people but it's hard for people that understand that those aspects and that those things happen to actually parse out that there's good about it too and that there's a lot of really valuable lessons in these books. Hundred percent look II get it. I mean you you know, it's like a what are off what our fathers teach us. How did your father still alive? Well, I don't really know him I've of complicated family history. Well father's Our Father figures have a stepfather he still alive, but I'm close to him.


Well stepfather when he goes you'll find that some things where the message here in the message weren't born exactly in simpatico shayana me that me. Oh the messenger app, would you like oh bullshit. You weren't following all that stuff. No, you take the message. This is the stuff you can that could work for you that maybe they wanted it for you. They couldn't follow through on it themselves there certain parts of the Bible that had that to you. Don't throw out the whole you can't think it's it makes any sense to throw out the whole book is what we're doing in society now, I mean, we're we're making people persona non grata because of something they do or you know in that is that is right now deemed wrong or it's the hot point and a Hot Topic right now.


You can't erase someone's entire existence where the heck does some forgiveness. Go again that like optimism. It's not erasing the crisis is not saying it wasn't a problem first. It's not saying that there's version parts of the Bible that have been people have bastardized and used in the wrong way, but you don't throw the whole book out and say well, it's all it's all bad. Then it's all these because that's false. Have you encountered difficulty expressing this in Hollywood? You know Hollywood is predominantly left-wing and very secular or Jewish in some circles, but it's not like a place where Christian fundamental values are espoused openly, you know, a lot of Jewish folks are in Hollywood and that seems to be okay with a lot of people but some other Legends particularly, if your fundamentalist Christian or if you have Christian values a lot of people frown upon that why do you think that is and if you have you had difficulties with that, I don't know.


I haven't had difficulties I have had and I won't know any people in the bus, but I have had Moments where I was on stage receiving an award in front of my peers in Hollywood. And there were people in the crowd that I have prayed with before dinners many times. And when I thank God I saw some of those people go to clap but then notice that bad thing on my resume and then sit back on their hands. Wow. And I've seen people read the room and go.


Whoa, that wouldn't bode. Well for me in the future if for getting a job or you're getting votes or what have you I have seen that I've witnessed that I don't judge them for it. I just wish you know that that was that it seems like a silly argument. There's it's a you know, one of the things that are people some people in our industry not all this there's some that go to the left so far as our friend Jordan Pederson who's back. So I just feel being back that go to the are liberal left side so far that is so condescending and patronizing.


To 50% of the world that need the empathy that the Liberals had gives it should give to to to to throw some what he's illegitimi chose them because they say they are believer. It's just so arrogant and in some ways hypocritical to me. Yeah, so I haven't run into you know, I haven't had but had trouble on that but I've always you look my my career. I've pretty much gone my own my own path and by hook or by crook just trying to figure a way out into what I was doing and I haven't haven't measured her notice where it has harmed or gotten my way of what I wanted to achieve in Hollywood.


I think he slipped through the net. You got first far enough down the river where it's not going to be a problem. Well kind of like when I you know, like my mom when I first got famous, you know, it just great story in the book. Right when I got famous. I'm trying to figure my own shit out, right and then next night. I got to call my buddy says hey you watch this on the quad his turn on hard copy and there's my mom with the cameraman taken a guy through our house going. This is where I caught him in bed with Melissa. I'm doing the narrow to worry about it's no big deal. I've seen it a thousand times and I'm going I call her up in like Mom. What did you do? Just like what I got.


Don't say what I can hear it in your on the other than the line you're watching it too is hard copies Echo. I didn't think you'd find out where my mom and is relationship was strained. I couldn't I didn't have a mother to talk to to share things with because Helen show up on hard copy the next night my career got solidified enough, you know, but II slipped through the net I was I was stable enough. I went in let go of the reins and said Mom you go for it. You can take the mic anytime you can hit that red carpet where your short leather dress and talk, whatever. Or sell whatever stories you want to but again, it took a while for me to feel stable enough to slip through the net let her go be herself as well this thing you're talking about with people disparaging people for their opinions and their beliefs and their the the way they're living their life.


I think a lot of this is coming from this condensed way of impersonal communication that we're getting from social media. I think it's this is so much of the way people are judging people and the way people are You negating with people one-on-one is how human beings are supposed to talk. That's how we're supposed to work things out and when you look at a person's eyes and you experience their their feelings and you read their social cues, that's how we communicate and that's how we work things out and hash things out and and figure each other out and maybe someone has a different set of beliefs and you but they happen to be your neighbor and you like them and you like hey man, tell me what's it like to be a Sikh.


What is it like to be Muslim? Does it what are your beliefs as a Quaker? Like what do you what's going on in your life? Tell me I had a neighbor who was one of my favorite neighbors I've ever had. It was a Scientologist and he was a weird dude man, but he was always friendly as hell and I would go outside we'd have weird conversations about these things that he was doing and I just try to figure him out and he try to figure me out. We you know, we always waived with each other. We're always friendly I missed that guy, but he he and I if we were talking on Mine I be like, you know if I was a younger man, and I was dumber and he said something about his belief and I thought that was stupid.


I'd probably say what kind of dumb shit is that you believe that nonsense written by science fiction author, but talking to the guy that that was never the way I talk to him when he and I were looking at each other. We're just two neighbors trying to figure each other out and just trying to be friendly and have a harmonious neighborhood. Well, it's one of the one of the things I think you're going to like about your new home the city think I mentioned this to when I when I when I called you to say welcome, you know, when the great things about Austin, Texas is even though it's the blueberry and tomato soup the the more liberal City and the conservative State you can see neighbors next door to each other talking each other and one has a trump sign the yard.


The other one has a Biden sign in the yard. They're still having a conversation. No one's going sneaking out tonight. Like to go rip that other person to sign out. Yeah, it's when Austin is at its best. It has it has that, you know, I think that the you know, and I've got young children and they're starting to get we don't allow my social media yet, but you see these people were living in a time where you put out. Something of yourself and your old value of yourself is reliant on what the world out there strangers. You don't know comment about that and if I put out a picture that I'm really happy excited about on Instagram tonight. And if I'm going to look what the reaction is and the majority says LF you were gone.


I this all of a sudden I have a bad night. I'm having a bad time. But if you go same picture and you go awesome and the consensus awesome all of a sudden. You've controlled how I feel and I'm having a great night. I'm going to great mood. So we're at the we're sort of at the behest people of were reacting. That's that's kind of what we're doing more in this Earth We're reacting and you look at you know things that things that go on on issues right now. It's everyone's reacting to two things instead of it said of creating the story or having an opinion coming out of the gate and hey, I Then it to some extent because people getting you get hired and fired on those things these days.


Yeah, you know hired and fired by that you hired and fired or not hired because you don't have as many people following your whatever it is. That's a measure now of what we call success in this life, you know art, what's up at the top in America money and fame baby. You got that. You made it in America. You are successful. We Pat you on the back. We give you respect. I got nothing against money and fame. I got money and I'm famous, but that's not where my value system lies are what I'm what is most important to me and what I'm trying to teach my kids is a way to get that and if you can do it in a way that have your value system lets play it as praise that but it's tough because that's not what the world right now, especially America rewards people for Yeah, I think there's a real issue with social media in particular with children in that we're just not designed for that.


We're not designed for that kind of communication and it's so easy to dismiss someone who's just text on a screen. It's so easy to do to shut people down and it's you see people getting praised because they're famous and because they're wealthy. I mean how much of what social media is for? A lot of young kids is seeing famous people in front of Lamborghini. He's with a million dollar watch on. It's a bizarre posing ritual that people are doing it's very strange. I mean story about that. I'm in Miami Southeast now mind you I really like Miami because it's so obvious. I mean an Ela equal get like a boob job or lip job or a cap shop and they try to say no.


It's all natural in Miami. They go. I just got my calf job. I just got a boob job. Wait, hold up. Hold up cap jobs. How many people get have jobs? Oh God guys will go get a calf implant Is that real? That's still happening and a Miami. They're proud. They're showing you like they're they're out that there's no shame in that. There's no embarrassment not being that. All right. I'm in Miami making a film that was the beach bum and I'm walking along the beach and there's this guy unbuttoned silk shirt got gold chains on his all greased up. He's leaning it's his purple Lamborghini and he's got something taken pictures of him and I'm seeing what When I set the palm trees in the back of the ocean, so I asked him I said what are you doing?


He goes? Oh man. I'm to give this picture taken for my Tinder page man in the next 20 minutes two other guys came by and I asked a guy go is that your Lamborghini goes? No. No. I just rented it for the day for my tender page pick two guys walk by in the next 20 minutes. And paid him 50 bucks to lean against his purple rented Lamborghini to get their tender page pick. What if it works? Okay, we're gonna work on someone and he got his he's got his rent paid for his verbal Lamborghini.


Yeah. Well, Miami should have a passport to go there. It's it's barely America. It's a lot of fun. It's a great place as a lovely city. I love visiting there, but I don't think You got get ever lived there. I go to Miami and I just go you guys are fucking out of control. Look at that. It's the only place before I was doing my last Netflix special. I was using these Yonder bags and one Yonder bag is is you have to put your cell phone in the bag when you go in there. So he can't film the show or you can't talk on it. And the idea is that the people won't be distracted because their cell phone will be in this magnetic pouch. You have it you have possession of your phone. Nobody's taking your phone, but when you want to leave or use the phone, Someone someone's going to call you.


Maybe got a babysitter. You can go outside. They'll open the pouch up and then you use your phone. Okay, most shows I did this I did shows all over the country the show's people were more attentive. They sat down they didn't get distracted by their phone and they just listen in Miami. All they did was get up and go outside. So the whole show the fucking shows like an hour and 45 minutes. It's just people getting up and going out and coming back and getting up and coming back and getting up and coming back it was Like people were constantly going back and forth. I don't know if they're doing coke or if they're just part but they were they the idea of have not having their phone with them. They're like what the fuck I need my phone.


You're so distracted. So chaotic. It was a lot of fun though, and I'm not really complaining where the mannequins even the mannequins have fake boobs. It's true. It's true. It is true. If you go to a department store the manager the mannequins have giant fake boobs. Yeah because look the girl. Is that want to buy those clothes also have fake boobs. They don't want some weird Natural Body I come I gotta know. It's gonna look like I'm me and I again, I'm not shitting on Miami. I love it here. I love it. Yeah rather, but I always said if you want to starve to death open up a book store in Miami. Ain't nobody buying books there.


Nobody's buying green light. They might get the audio book. Listen to when they're on the treadmill, but it's a wild place and and that show that I did the shows that I did down there. They were fun. I had a great time. The audiences were great. They were they laugh hard, but they were just all over the place just up and down and back and up and back and coming back and sitting down scuse me. Pardon me up more people. I'm like you We're out of fucking control. Yeah, it's a it's an obvious Place. Have you ever seen the documentaries Cocaine Cowboys? Yes. Well, that's all the whole cult like how it all got started down there the craziness.


Let's do those Cocaine Cowboys one and two of my all-time favorite documentaries. Just Miami's got a wild fucking history. Yeah, it does and stories like that make great films though. No, because there's some there's there's real live stories about this country in particular but this world in general that you know, like Scarface or something like that. We're just like this is kind of based on reality. You know, it's one of the beautiful things about a film is that a film like Scarface will make you look into that. Like what how much of this is real. Did they really do that? Oh, yeah, they really did send over prisoners and release prisoners come to America and they really Have hundreds and thousands of murders and gun violence over the streets and cocaine everywhere and that's real that was real.


Yeah, and was happening. You know, that that's a You know the best it's always said, you know, true stranger stranger than fiction. But yeah, I mean, I one of the one of the words have a page in the book about my least favorite word in the English language being unbelievable. No, it's all pretty doggone believable. And you see it happening like yep. Wow, I didn't think that was possible. Well damn sure was and is usually stranger than any Hollywood script could make it or more exciting. Yeah. I say unbelievable too often and it's sort of a placeholder word for Shit, right, you know unbelievable but I it is believable. Yeah, for sure.


I mean you have to be pretty odd in this day and age to be unbelievable. I don't remember the last thing I saw that was unbelievable whatever or whether it's like are you fucking kidding me? I'm like, you know boys one thing you can depend on people being its people. Yeah. Well, so in your life right now when you know, you've had this incredibly successful career and I was assuming you're still writing down these list of things to do when you when you look at like what you would like to accomplish me. You've accomplished so much in the world of acting and film making is there something out there that really is a goal or a thought that's sticking in your mind something you haven't done yet.


Yeah. One thing you got to do this at the top of the list is do my best to Shepherd three young children through this life so they can go off and be independent and autonomous and hopefully competent young individuals. That's that's priority number one, but personally there's a there's a role that I've created an assumed for myself called minister of culture and it's about finding a shared. Competent value system and it's something that I'm going to initialize it. Hopefully right there in Austin values. As far as I can tell are the the common denominator that there they've always been cool.


There's ones that we can agree on they work then they work now, they will not go out of style. We're in such a time right now where our social contracts are so broken and the broken with ourselves as well. We don't have expectations of each other or ourselves. It's kind of anarchic. Got a nation divided in an office in particular as a very popular in fast-growing City changing a lot. And you know if Austin is a city it was starts to consume or more than it creates start to not be conscious with of it with its money starts not to invest in itself. If too many people come to Austin from California where they come from and try to turn offs in into a why they left where they were coming from.


We're going to look up in 10 years and go what the hell happened man and Austin's got a lot of soul. Got a lot of soul. And I think it lies in its values. So this this sort of campaign movement that I want to push is reminding those of us from Austin why we love it there Austin's a place where nobody's too good that was good enough and initiating and educating newcomers and saying hey, here's Who We Are Who were not if you don't really want to abide by who we are and what we believe in make it a stop not a steak. Keep on moving. Um, but I think austinites have earned that and I think newcomers will appreciate that. I want to look up in 10 years and being an Austin be a city.


That's an example of a place that became a metropolis that held on to its soul that you know, the things you look at around town crime rate employment Etc are still at numbers that are incredibly respectable, but we don't get don't get loose. It's a very creative town, you know, and And like I said, it's the blueberry in the in the in the red state, but it's not an anarchic town. It's not a dirty town. It's not a sloppy town. It's an Innovative Town. That's a creative town and it's a young town and you know, I think we all know progress is not saying yes to every new thing progress is more about Innovation, but it's also relying on tried and true things that work have worked and will continue to work and I just want to remind us all the certain values that we have.


As is off tonight and as individuals and you know where that goes from there if that goes outside of Austin and through the United States is it's a scalable idea that I dream of that could go outside the United States to go it could go worldwide and success. I like looking at cities and people looking at cities as individuals that have personalities and reminding the people sit. Let's sell what sell a city to the people that live in it sell Austin to austenite and the people who have come into it. It that's that's that's my goal. That's what I'm into right now. That's the character that I'm inhabiting right now in my life. That's not on a screen. I wanted to I wanted to say hey the Big Show's live life the recorders always on and what's the story were telling in life?


That's that's the best the character. I want to play right now in my life outside of my family. That's not on any kind of screen or any kind of Capsule that's going to be on your television screen. It's just going to pull it off. It's going to be something that I'm just living. Doing I'm coming There's Something About This Town. That's very unique. And I knew it for years. I've been coming here do a stand-up since the 90s. But you know when the the pandemic hit and I decided to move here. I did have that feeling like boy a lot of Californians are going to move here. How do we not fuck it up and you and I had this very conversation, like don't turn this into the place you left. So what specifically do you think?


You'll need to not do. Not do yeah. Well you coming to Texas because you got didn't owe taxes you're coming to Austin because it's affluent. It's happening you're coming for the people the food the swing. It's happened to creative down its alive. Its young. She got to pay a tithe. That's not do for you ask what you can do. Yeah in personalize the place man, I mean give your tithe to the city. It is a place. Like I said that nobody's Good in everybody's good enough. We don't run over people to get where we're going. Austin will open up their proverbial Rolodex and you tell me if you wouldn't if you felt this with yourself quicker than any City I've ever been to as a newcomer.


Oh, yeah, you want to you want some contacts here? Yeah. I mean in some ways. I'm like Austin boy you you know, you maybe could take more ownership of that IP, but it gives it away. It's very free. And we trust it's a very trusting town and a town of second chances for people but don't take advantage of that. Freedom understand that there's responsibility to the freedoms that we have that the we do have to earn it daily and don't just over leverage our self in spend because hey, we're the most popular person in school right now. Don't get caught looking in the mirror at ourselves going on a great look at us. We're number one. We're popular. Uh, we still got boots on and we still pull them on and strap them on and get in get in get work done.


Even though we're young and Innovative and Tech Town. We're still A classic and you know, it's accountability its responsibility to fairness to other to other people. It's understanding. Where is Austin idealic. And what is it really because in some ways I think of Austin I'm finding out it's not as ideal as I think it is in my in my mind and well I've got well, I've got a listening to it and I talked about the diversity in Austin and it is a international destination. I talked about the you know, the the quality of Austin, you know the rule and Austin has always been all you got to do is be yourself. That's kind of the rule. That's what's cool about Austin.


Not what you think you ought to be but just be yourself doesn't matter if you're blue haired short lesbian American Indian Cowboy Sheriff, whatever everyone sitting at the same bar having a drink and no one's yelling about their place because if you yelling about how I want to let you know how I'm different and Austin Austin, is that going what were you on about? We didn't Take care. That's one of the great things about Austin at best. It celebrates differences when also is at its best Austin's not trying to homogenize people say hey, we're all the same. No, we're not we're all very different and that's cool. But we do have some social contracts amongst us where it clean place. We don't like cheat and steal to get where we're going.


We look ahead but we appreciate Tradition at the same time. We take care as much as we can of of our our natural beauties around here say I'm time. We're Metropolis. We're growing up. Now, how can we go up and wide and still grow deep? That's what I want to leave into is what are the roots? So we're not just again looking up in 10 years and going who do we become where did all these socialites come from? You know? Yeah one thing that's plaguing Los Angeles that I'm starting to see here is the homelessness intent form all over the city lost Los Angeles is out.


Control, I mean it's bizarre that it hasn't been handled. I mean, I was just having a conversation with my friend Brian about it before the show and he was telling me that in Burbank. They just shut that down. They won't let it happen. You can't just put up a tent somewhere. I mean, I'm an empathetic person and I think that you know, all the people that are out there that are homeless that are down on their luck for whatever reason whether it's they've been abused or they're alcoholics or drug addicts or whatever it is. They're all our brothers. Others and sisters and I don't I'm not a social engineer. I don't know what the solution is to something like that. But I know that it gets out of hand. It's gotten that if you go to Venice my friend Bridges sent me a video of her driving down Venice and it's a mile of tents.


I mean a straight mile she got the phone out the window and it's just tents everywhere like it's it's crazy. How does someone how do you put a stop to that without being an asshole? How do you maintain empathy and say hey you can't put a fucking tent up on the sidewalk. A great question and I don't know the answer. You said it earlier look a lot of these most of these people have a mental challenge we've got drugs and so, you know and often, you know, putting some in up him some some vacated hotels. I don't know to what extent that's that's working.


You know, I've Got Friends that businesses downtown whoo-hoo. They've got homeless people camping out in front and if someone walks in there they're Berated by this person that's homeless that has this mental something mentally Askew and they're not in their nugget. I don't know. You can't eliminate the problem. But how do you re you know, this question of how do we rehabilitate is an ongoing question? Not just with homeless people, you know, it's you know with people that aren't that don't have mental problems. It's we have the question of Rehabilitation. I mean, For those people I'm like, well you have to be sincerely seeking retribution and and understand what you did wrong to get the chance to be forgiven and be in rehabilitate and get a second chance for the homeless people.


I think you know, I mean, I think if you're going to go to the how do we how do we get a more mentally stable or in can we to what extent get them mental help and not just keep picking them up and saying let's move. Into this side of the curve and well that curve got full. Let's move into this side of the curb and then you end up with you know, a shanty town or something. It's you know, I think they're always going to be to some extent, you know, there's going to be homeless. There's always going to be some socio economic imbalance only we're ever going to that's another thing that I think we have to as a people especially on the left have to realize this is so perfect equality amongst all of us imperfect Justice.


I don't think that's a possibility. Double destination for anybody. I think it's great to keep America is a constant Chase to chasing a cat. Yes. It's we never will get there and that's the point just keep chasing it try to have a little Ascension in our in our journey going forward and a little bit of evolution, but we're never going to arrive at this utopian state where Tada we did it. It's the Garden of Eden before. Apple was eating, you know, it's not going to happen. I don't believe so. I don't I question how to how the best way to rehabilitate situations and like the homeless one all the time.


And I don't I don't know the answer I do if we can get him some mental health and then give somebody, you know, not just we can make jails not just a holding cell we think about if jails really worked what you've done your time. You ought to be even money, right? Yeah, you should be better. You're not even money. They're coming out at the Scarlet Letter Scarlet Letter on you and you're going to have to work five times harder than the next guy to get that job. You know, if you're an offender of such you're going to be found in located in they're going to share your location through through the city and you're going to find out from your neighbor that you're moving in and you can understand the people going. I don't want that. Somebody's living next door to me.


Right? Well if Rehabilitation worked it would be like well, no, it's okay. They did their stint. It doesn't really work like that. So it's a constant question I have about about how to what's the best way to rehabilitate you no one seems to have an answer. It's a everyone throws their hands up in the air and just keeps on moving. Just what are you? I don't know, you know, one of the things you're talking about before Jordan Pederson talks about that equality of outcome is a terrible idea equality of opportunity is a fantastic idea. The opportunity to succeed, but the problem with equality of outcome is there's not a quality of effort.


And that's one of the beautiful things about Society is that you and this is what we're talking about before about reading your Memoir and reading an autobiography of a successful person is realizing that there's work to be done. There's things you have to do in order to to be this person that people to admire and it doesn't come easy and some people aren't going to do that work and if they're not going to do that work, they're not going to achieve that outcome. That's just life and you know and the equality of opportunity, you know, that's not even real because different people start off a different blocks in life. They start off in different spots. They start off with different challenges and different physical attributes and and physical problems.


Everyone has their own hand of cards that you're dealt. But treating people equally and giving people the best possible chance that we can as a Community and as a culture, that's what we all strive for and the problem with the homeless situation and the problem with prisons. It's a similar problem. Is that the downtrodden the people that have hit a bad spot in the game of life, like what is our responsibility to them? And if we are Community look there's only three of us in one of us is fucked up we go. Hey, let's help Mike, you know, he's fucked up what straight try to bring Mike into the fold and and give him some life lessons and And give them some love and hope that we can bring them back up to a point where a couple of years from now.


We're looking back on this going. Hey look too used to be over there. Now you're here and everything's great. That's what we'd ultimately love but there's almost too many challenges and to many people and everybody has their own problems. So people throw their arms up their arms up in the air and they keep moving and these things don't seem to get better. The prison population seems to increase homeless population, especially during this pandemic is increased. I don't have answers You know, I really don't so it's I'm spinning my wheels as much as the next guy. Yeah. Yeah, it's a you know, it's a questions yet to be answered on many levels before this time after that after this time, you know that equal opportunity.


That's that would be the gig that would be there. Yes, then then you could measure because we are all born with different innate abilities. And if we're fortunate enough to be in position we go. Oh, well, I'm going to do what I'm good at and I'm going to work my backside off for it, and I'm Get educated about I'm willing to put in the work you America is a place that that's the American dream you could use that's what they mean by the land of opportunity. If you should have the chance to pursue what you want to do and if you're willing to work for it and get educated on it. You have an opportunity to make a life. I understand. There's not complete equal opportunity across the board. I understand that. I personally was born with different innate abilities then you or someone else.


I was also born with more opportunity more opportunities than a lot of people I was born into a two-parent family. That's one of our biggest disease is I think in the in the in the that we have in this case is that the the family unit breaks out sometimes too quickly too easily. You know, Mom or Dad Jets the going gets tough too quickly. Um, so, you know, I you know, I was some would say asymmetrically speaking. I'm a good-looking guy. So that's got me indoors that maybe wouldn't have got other people in to try to do my best ones. I got in the door. I'm not going to apologize for any opportunity I've had but I do understand that I've had opportunities that other people have not had I've created many on my own but I've also been introduced in met people who open those doors for me.


That would not have been open for other people. Yeah. What are we? What do we do with them? I think there's a place and this is what I'm striving to get to and understand more and more. None of us do a damn thing about anything unless it's personal intellectually we talk about it. It makes sense but really don't take action until it's trespassing on our walls and it's going to affect me or you or on my family. That's when we go. Okay. I'm going to take action. So I think what are we do is got to be personal the the choice that I'm making for my own selfish choice for me. There's a place where there's a choice. We're that also is what's best for the most amount of people where the personal choice is.


Also the best choice for the most amount of people. I called the egotistical utilitarian. That's where the eye meets the we that's that's where we're what we want is what we need and what we need is actually what we want. Or what's best for us is best for the most amount of people wear. What where were the most self less? We're actually the most selfish where the matter where the most selfish. We're actually the most selfless. That's the place where when I talk about like green lights. There's a place to create green lights that are best for ourselves and others at the same time. That's the honey hole. I don't know exactly what that place is all the time. But that's the place. I think we could all be a little more conscious of how we go about moving forward and making choices based on that.


Austin seems to be of a manageable size as I was trying to describe this to one of my friends in La he's like, what's so great about Austin. I was like first of all people aren't devalued because there's not too many of them. There's a problem with when there's too many people then people become a nuisance. There's too many of them. Austin doesn't have that problem. So when I look at like the homelessness problem in Austin like, you know what this is not out of control yet. This seems like you could still fix that like One's got to realize that this could get out of hand. And this is the thing that you can kind of it's within the boundaries of resources to step in and manage this and it made it now.


Yes before I'm gonna tell ya jump in ten years ago shit is too late. It's out of control like Venice. Yeah it just grow and turn our backs on that and not look at it. Now all of a sudden it's out of hand, and I don't know what to do with anything and it's quick. It happens quick Venice. Two years ago was not this there was a few tents every you know here and there you'd see tense now, it's fucking Bonkers and I would I mean obviously you're dealing with a much larger population in California, but this this place is special. I mean it really is there's it's a great size and the people here are really exceptional. It's it does have a personality.


It has a very unique like a mixture of cowboys and It's a weird spot. You know, it's that melting blending of all these different types of people here is made it very tolerant and very unique and that the fact that there's the university here and there's a lot of artistic people musical people and creative people so real it's real good spot and I'm happy to be here but I don't want to fuck it up, I guess. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of you know, there's that there is a community in Austin and Austin at his best does come together and realize that it has an identity. To move forward with to protect and you're right. It's not so big and I believe that it can grow and but it can grow while still having a sense of itself and its own identity and in to protect that identity and grow forward Turn the Page progress.


Yes, it's coming but also preserve the core DNA of who we are we're no longer the Little Hippie town that sits had some music in the capital and University nowhere.com Tech town were Banker town lawyer down. Destination all those things, that's fine. But in that there's a there's a you know, Austin has own I want to help defined by listening to a lot of Austin has what our constitution is in Austin that separate from anywhere else. So this is something you're actively trying to do. You said a minister of culture. This is something you have a thought in your head of how to how to do this. Yes. I have a shared values campaign.


That I put together and I want to sort of advertise and sell Austin to Austin all around Austin and it's just sort of sort of value-based aspirational messages just to remind us who we are to to keep the community as tight as possible to form expectations and solidify expectations amongst ourselves. So if some of the acts outside of those there noticed and the kind of nudge back is another thing often. Very well Austin Austin, I don't know how it is. Now since we've had like the protest with black lives matter and stuff, but Austin used to be there's a great.


Relationship with police force not just with me with see in Matthew McConaughey walk down the street with John and Jane Doe you going to crowd, you know, you and Jay walking across the street they caught you before in like nudge you over today don't do it before they gave you the ticket. There was a there was a play of like they were part of the community. They could they felt like, you know, you give them away if you didn't see a cop and Austin go oh shit, you saw one of you waved and if you if they weren't looking you never felt like they Looking to get you from crimes low, you know, so we'll see how that relationship has to be worked on in the city of Boston right now, you know quite a bit.


Yeah, what were your thoughts when the the whole idea to defund the police came to fruition? Well, let's break that down one defunded police that Monica if you wanted to say it. It's almost like it should have been renamed because fee-funded police does not sound anything like Like there's been money reallocated to different areas of handling some police exercise. It sounds like you got a million. We're taking 300,000. Good luck. Yeah, um, and it's not exactly what it is to be fair. The community and the police and not just in Austin, but all over and I think they are doing this in Miami to bring up Miami need to get back together and the community needs to say here's what's unfair.


Here's how here's how I feel unfair as a black man or a person of color or or whatever situation. Here's here's here's my problem with my relationship with you as cough. Well the police got to get clear to go. Okay. Force is it screwed up? We have to have Law and Order. Do we all agree on that? Yes, we can all agree on that. We got a few bad apples that even need to be trained better. So we don't have those kind of bad apples or people or cops choking under under under on not and I mean the word as in you fumbling at the goal line. I don't mean literally choke and I mean that that don't follow through on out on their Duty in the right way when they're under that when they're under the gun of the under the Heat of the Moment.


That's what I mean. They're cops that have done that so few of these Apple's need to be removed, but they also we need to make sure we're training them better now. They also the cops even though the couch and go can y'all remember and understand our point of view that we're like the tow truck driver. We're not called when there's good news. We're called when it's bad news. So we're coming in going looking for trouble. All right, so we're already under stress if we even get a call. So can y'all help us in our way that we communicate? Can we get Trust? Again that if a cop says Hey Stansfield pig and a pot of gold about. Yep. I'm doing that that we're not going to be something is not going to happen to us that shouldn't that there will be a you know, because obviously the situations like that you're not being called you're not in that situation when it's good news, you know, so everyone's already tensions are high but that's you know, as far as the fund.


We're going to see my we're to see if there's reallocation of money like an Austin another Is how that works? I mean my first gut instinct was I don't see how that repairs. The relationship between the community and the police force. I don't see how that's coming together. It's I don't see how that's going to rehabilitate that relationship. And now you have spite on on both sides again. We're going to see I don't know if we really had a bird in hand when we made the change. Do we have we practice these other we seen these other forms where the reallocated money goes to for 911 calls and stuff, but we've seen these other forms work.


And we've seen them be Improvement. I don't know so hopefully we'll see if this is just sort of guinea pig in the idea. We'll see how it works. But I'm more for saying okay instead of taking away your money and your funds which you can use to train better and work on the relationship of what your what your job is and what you expect and what communities expect from you I'd rather have done that then pull money from So we're going to see how this experiment goes. Yeah, I couldn't agree more. I think they need training. They need more training and more understand. I think we all need to understand that there's a tremendous amount of these people that are under insane stress every day and they probably have massive PTSD and you know, if you're every time you're pulling somebody over you're worried about getting shot every time you're visiting someone's apartment for a domestic abuse case.


You're worried. You're going to get killed. You're going to see someone killed you've seen murders. And deaths and the human mind is not designed to deal with that kind of stress day in day out and a lot of these people are you know, when you see these horrible reactions that cops have two situations with a do completely overstep their boundaries and and abused people. I think a lot of those people are really fucked up by the time they get to that point and I don't I'm almost people were fucked up before that day. That's right. They got order before they even became a cop or they became a cop for the right reason. They had prob personal problems.


And we need to filter those people out and that also comes through training the same kind of training that they filter people out through the military. You know, when you want to be a Navy SEAL, you got to go through Buds and good luck. If you have a lot of character flaws, you're not going to make it you they will be exposed and I think that counseling and training and then in with the communities what we need, we don't need to defund them. It seems like a popular social sentiment that people are repeating because it puts you in this ideology of a person who cares and is Progressive but I don't think it's ever been fleshed out. I don't think people have thought it out in the long term and if you look at the consequences of how this is playing out in New York City homicides are up by hundreds of percent burglaries armed robberies.


Everything's up. It's not good that the defunding of the police has been horrible for new. City the consequences have been the exact opposite with everybody hoped they'd be right now. I'm worried about that here as well. But Governor Abbott is stepped in and said he's going to put a stop to that which is you know, there's talk about not giving the the towns that do this. They're not going to have access to property taxes. And this is you know, obviously there's no income tax in Austin and and in the state of Texas, so the governor is supposedly stepped in and going to iron this out. Out so I'm hoping it works out and cooler heads prevail. Me too.


I'm with you training and have more reverence for the job and understand they're called in when they're not called them when it's good news. You know, my my brother rooster has a real good interesting take I think on like, you know gun control in Texas is a big right to carry state in gun A gun stay but He brought up the samurai sword how there was a reverence for it. And I remember how we were brought up. You got your toy gun. And then you got your Daisy one pump and until you've mastered that like not turning and ever you turned and even though it wasn't octave and it was a meet. Someone got the gun take it away from you. You know what I mean, but you have to master the Daisy Gun first and then after years of that you moved up to the 22 and you had to master that and you'd make sure it was always unloaded and put back in the case.


You've got a reverence for this tool. There's a Long sort of initiation reverence before you could move up to a larger gun. Yeah, we've lost a reverence for that tool and the samurai sword is a good example because there's a reverence for that you there's an initiation period to get to where you could have that right and and I think that being you know is that's kind of one of the places where I lie with the that is too easy to get to get a gun. Sometimes that there that there should be that background. Check which goes back and do what we're talking about with police force background tread training have a reverence for the job understand the expectations understand.


It's a high-stress job. Can you handle it? Let's learn how to handle it because they have to call audibles in the moment that our life audibles. Yeah. And as we said get rid of the ones who can't get it is a hard job and hard jobs are not for everybody. Nope, I think that and that's that punishes the good cops. Yes. Someone does a horrible thing like the George Floyd case all those good cops would never think about doing that ever in their life ever are lumped into the same category as that guy. And I think that's awful. Yep. Great. Yeah.


Listen man. I enjoy talking to you. This is great. I really do and I wish you luck with your book and I loved your movies and I wish you nothing but success and And let's get together and break bread someday. I look forward to it Joe. Thanks, man enjoyed talking to you and I look forward to doing it in person. Let's do it brother. Thank you. Thank you. Good luck with the book. Goodbye. Thank you friends for tuning into the show. And thank you to my all-time favorite undies the ones I'm wearing right now. I don't even have to check because it's all it where me undies they're the best to get 15% off your first order and free shipping. Shipping go to me undies.com Rogan.


That's me. Undies.com Rogan. We're also brought to you by stamps.com bringing all the amazing Services the US Post Office right to your door kids. You don't have to go anywhere. Don't spin a minute of your holiday season at the post office. You can get all the amazing Services of the US Post Office and UPS right from your home computer or your work or wherever you use it. I know for stamps.com instead of going to the post office has no risk and with the promo code JRE you get a special offer that includes a four-week trial plus free postage and a digital scale with no long-term commitments and no contracts.


Just go to stamps.com click on the microphone at the top of the homepage and type in JRE that stamps.com and enter JRE stamps.com. Never go to the post office again. Mmmmm, and we're also brought to you by Roca the only sunglasses I wear I even wear the readers they make amazing. I wear great prescription glasses and this their patented titanium bendable temples or this shit. Once you use them I'm telling you you're not going to want to use any other kind of sunglasses or eyeglasses. They're super comfortable. They're the best and they're gonna hook you up. JRE listeners get 20% off with the code Rogan.


So go to Roca.com Cam that's our okay a.com and check them out enter the code Rogan for 20% off check them out. These guys are right here in Austin and there I where is the shit? Thank you friends. Thank you for tuning to show much. Love to everyone out there, bye-bye and a big kiss.