
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode of the podcast is brought to you by whoop. I am using whoop 24/7 to track my fitness to make sure I'm getting enough sleep and it's especially important now because it's sober October. This is a different year because I'm the only one who's doing sober October. I think arry and Bert and Tom are probably drunk right now, but I'm in and one of the reasons why I'm in is first of all David Goggins kind of forced me to do it, but he Challenged me and I had to do it but also because I know a lot of people were looking forward to this many people use sober October as an opportunity to develop bed better habits. Get your shit together to clean your life up and one of the best ways to do that is by taking a whole month off with no booze.


Another great way to do it is to work out constantly and consistently and I'm doing that and I'm doing it with Whoop. I'm using my whoop Fitness tracker to make sure that I get actionable data. Is a 24/7 Fitness tracker that I wear all the time? It's the best wearable I've ever used and it lets me know if I'm getting enough sleep if I'm recovered how much strain I'm putting my body through you can even track how your body recovers on days you do or don't drink and you get insights into how it impacts your sleep performance and your recovery. Whoop is the best fitness tracker I've ever used as it doesn't just track calories and steps it monitors sleep strain recovery.


Re-rate resting heart rate you name it and it provides real insight in real time by quantifying data and helping you better understand how your body works on a deeper level. So I recommend it to anybody that's doing sober October or anybody that's trying to build better healthier habits and one of the things that I really love about whoop, it lets me set daily goals for myself based on how well my body is performing. So every day I get a recovery score based on how well my body is responding. Work out or even just going about my day to day routine and based on that. I know whether or not my body can handle a Savage workout or whether I need to chill and for listeners this podcast.


Whoop is going to hook you up. They're offering you 15% off all products head over to whoop. That's wh oop.com and to Rogen Ro Gan at checkout and save 15% off, so don't forget join me and Oop this sober October as we sleep better recover faster and train smarter and stay sober with whoop. We're also brought to you by CB D MD. I am a big believer in CBD and this is an easy ad for me to do because I take CBD MD's products every single day.


They have amazing topical products that can help you relax. But recharge, they're great for sore muscles and sword joints. I take their tinctures the oil the CBD oils. I love their CBD gummies because it's like I'm eating candy, but it's actually really good for you CBD fries with menthols one of their my favorite products that they make it's an award-winning product that offers instant cooling relief for muscles and joints and it comes in a convenient easy to use roller, which is my favorite because I use it to dig into muscles and use it as Has like a massage tool or you can get it in a squeeze tube CBD recover is another amazing product that they have it contains CBD with inflammation fighting compounds like arnica and vitamin B6 to give you the support you need where it matters most and for me.


It's for sore muscles. It's just amazing for swarm muscles and shoulders and shit. I love it. I love all their products and to make it even easier for you to try this amazing Duel of topicals and everything else. CBD MD has to offer they're offering JRE listeners 25 percent off your next order when you use the promo code Rogan at checkout. So once again that CBD MD.com enter the promo code Rogan for twenty five percent off your purchase of their Superior CBD oil products from CB D MD. We're also brought to you by the mother fucking cash app.


Cash up. You probably already know cash app is the number one app in finance in all the land but it's also the easiest way to send money between your friends and family without having to hold that dirty paper cash. And on top of that the cash app is the best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry as stacking SATs SATs is short for Satoshi Satoshi is a legendary person who created bitcoin and no one knows who it is so mysterious but here's what's not mysterious Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority.


Doesn't that sound good? That sounds way better than what we're doing now, right? Well many people think it's the future of currency and you can hop on that future right now with the motherfucking cash app download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. And when you do download the cash app, make sure you enter the referral code Joe Rogan all one word. You will receive ten dollars and the cash app will send ten dollars to our good friend. Justin wrens fight for the Forgotten charity. So cash app enter the referral code Joe Rogan you win and fight for the Forgotten wins. It's a big win win for everybody.


We're also brought to you by all form. People are spending more time at home right now and let me tell you about the amazingly comfortable and high-quality all forms sofa all form makes premium customizable sofas and sectionals and chairs shipped right to your door. They've got armchairs. And love seats all the way up to an amazingly easy to set up 8p sectional that you can even have in a u-shape and an awesome color like gray or blue. It looks really high-end. It's super comfortable at a reasonable price and all form takes three to seven days to arrive in the mail. Then you assemble it yourself just a few minutes even I can do it.


It's a tool free assembly. You don't even need a screwdriver. It's so simple to do and you could always start small and buy more seats later if you want. You're all forms sofa to grow and change with you when you move all form is a very cool company you get to build a customized sofa made right here in America using premium materials. You pick your fabric the sofa color the color the legs sofa size and shape you make sure it's a perfect for you and your home and this fabric is all spill stain and scratch resistant, which is really good if you have kids or if you're a fucking slob like me, they also come with a Forever warranty like literally forever sounds amazing.


Right? And if you think that getting a sofa without trying it sounds a little risky. You don't need to worry you get a hundred days to decide if you want to keep it. It's more than three months and again a forever warranty and if you don't love it, they will come and pick it up for free and they'll give you a full refund. What more do you want folks? And I haven't got to the best part yet. All form is offering 20% off all orders for our Sneers at all form.com Joe. That's allf orm all form.com Joe. Alright friends my guests today.


Well, my guests today are the owners of my favorite all-time Coffee Company Black Rifle coffee. Probably seen me wear their t-shirts and do their ads before but they're more than that. It's Evan. Hey fur and Matt best and these guys are veterans. They're really into veteran supported causes and they give a lot of coffee and a lot of Charity to First Responders law enforcement military causes. They're just great human beings and this was a deep conversation. I mean we talked about all kinds of cool stuff like diet and just military life but in coffee, of course, but then we got into some heavy shit.


About the military industrial complex, and it was a very intense podcast. I but I really enjoyed it and I really love these guys and I love what they stand for and I love their company. So please give it up for Evan. Hey fur and Matt best of Black Rifle coffee. The Joe Rogan Experience trained by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day We're rolling were rolling. Holy shit, Kevin and Matt. Well, I've known you guys for a long time and I've enjoyed your coffee for a long time. So I'm happy you guys could come on here and talk some shit man. I love it. I love being on shows with Matt, especially with you.


This is fucking incredible. Dude, you're ridiculous setup that you put in the kitchen with all the the coffee and espresso. I video taped it. So people can see but the measuring of the weight of the grams these but I know you got into it. You were in the coffee before you're in the military, right? Yeah, and then you started bringing coffee and a roaster and whole set up with you overseas. But like we you this like measuring it and the the exact temperature of the water and all that jazz. Oh, yeah, I think like way back and late 90s, I guess is probably where it all began and I always say this where you know, every good story starts with a with a with a good check basically and I I met this Barista back in the late 90s and she turned me on to Espresso.


So I started really going down the rabbit hole and coffee. So she was just like really into espresso as wasn't she uses. She's hot and the Barista. So but that was the the gateway to this entire thing. And then as I continue to kind of evolve my coffee nerd, you know. Sensitive me I kind of was like, well, you know what this Green Beret thing sounds pretty cool. I would love to be able to do that jump out of planes maybe overthrow some countries. That's that sounds pretty Rad, but it never left and so I was still way into coffee.


It was roasting coffee on fires and on my stove and getting a different weird espresso machines and it's funny thing is back in when I was in SF guy people would make fun of me all the time like you hipster do Douchebag. What are you doing? One of you alive like sweet 30 minutes to make a cup of coffee are you doing well? That's why it's a funny contrast between this badass special forces guy and someone who's like really meticulous with their coffee. No cream. Don't you dare Jack car kind of makes fun of it in his books where he talks about like putting a honey in his Black Rifle coffee and half of it is just to kind of mock the fact that people who really love coffee will put Thing in it.


This is a travesty. They won't and Jack is one of my friends. So when he when he came out to the house, he was doing research for his buck. I was making a cup of coffee and he was like dude. This is fucking insane. Like how long is this going to take? I was like man, it's the takes as long as it takes so that entire setup that we just put in your studio. I had that in my coffee lab in my house that entire thing. Wow, and I'm out here in Eva's roasting coffee on my stove and going going way down the rabbit hole with with Jack and he's taking notes, you know for his book and he's a former seal, you know, so we're talking shit and he's like you must have just been picked on in the teams right now, maybe yeah, I guess that's like, you know, I was like if you just have to run fast because if you're going to do something weird like this, you got to be able to run really fast do a lot of fucking pull-ups and push-ups and shoot really well and I think that was one of the things where I was like man, I got to be really good at all these things because Going to offset all my dbadgery over here.


We respect you, even though you said balls deep in the coffee. It's an interesting story. He wouldn't we both had similar professions post-military as contractors and I was in this fob and I'm sitting there. I'm like why the fuck is there this like $50,000 espresso machine for a very small base in the middle of nowhere. Welcome to find three our three years later. I'm trying with Evan. I'm like, yeah do I know the agency bought some? Badass espresso. He's like, yep. That was me. I could put you so convinced the flyer and co-authored a by this super intricate freaking espresso machine in the middle of nowhere. I'm like, of course it was you of course, it was easy, right? So I that's exactly so that the entire story so I'm working at the agency then so fast forward a few years later and my the logistics person came to me and he or she was like, hey, what kind of espresso machine or coffee machine to buy it as like, oh, don't worry.


I'll send you the links to it and it was like $30,000 pressing machine from Froyo imported it from Italy and had it flown in through this some other logistics situation and she's like so this is it Mike. Yeah, but we still need a grinder to write and that was something that kind of lived in in not only like infamy that I had gotten the entire Logistics system to buy me an espresso machine from the there was no oversight like no one was like looking at the Counts and going what the fuck is contrary to popular belief, you know congressional oversight and budgets at times is a little bit hazy when you're in war they just kind of say here's lumps.


I'm you know, here you go. Here's here's twenty three million dollars as long as you can justify it. Maybe we'll be okay. We are networks to at the end of a fiscal year. They're like, we got some money to spend or we don't get this budget next year and honestly in Iraq early on it was like a dumpster fire with cash just it Tax dollars that were just burnt in that place and just dumb shit. You couldn't even imagine if when I look back on it now as a guy that's very vested and what's happening my tax dollars. I'm like what the fuck were these idiots doing like this is so dumb so dumb, like what was besides espresso machines. What was the other ridiculous shit that the money was being spent on?


Oh, well, I here's a great example So and I've got a myriad of them, but we He had a field of up armored vehicles that were really fucking expensive like 500,000 dollars a pop give or take we couldn't take him anywhere because they were so obvious that it was a up armored vehicle that you just drive around and people would want to take pot shots at you for the fun of it. So you have these beautiful half a million to a million dollar cars that you can't use so you got to go when we're working and the low-vis good pass. A means like you just trying to blend in just not get shot man.


Like don't pick a fight. Like let's just blend and do our job get the fuck out of here. But if you have a really expensive looking like G5 or something, that's just really a G5 in the middle of fucking Baghdad in a war zone. People are going to want to place pressure washed in all that Mercedes that big machine. Yeah. I did wagons like a bulletproof G-Wagon. Yeah, really? Yeah, dude. So G-Wagon all of this stuff is up-armored. So when you look at This like any vehicle you want you can get a level of armor to it. But if you buy the most ridiculous and expensive vehicle in the middle of fucking war-torn country X you're going to stick out like a sore thumb and the whole intent of the mission is to blend it.


So to my point you'll have fields of shit that you can't use because some dumb ass is pulling the trigger on your government tax dollars going. This looks good to me Moz will do. See how that looks. Yeah, why don't they take like an old Chevy Blazer and then retrofit it? Well, there's that too. You can do that. Do they do that? Oh, yeah, you can when you look go down I'll go down a rabbit hole and armored vehicles and obviously you probably wouldn't but if if you wanted an armored vehicle of any kind you can get it now. There are there are different armored vehicles from different companies. So for instance Mercedes builds their armored vehicles from ground up. It's it's one of the the best if not the best armored vehicle in the world.


It's built from ground up to me as a rodeo. Yeah. Yeah, the G-Class originally was military vehicle. Yeah. That's why it's so durable. Like my wife has one of those it's like the they take or is like fucking good chunk. It's not like any other car. It's so sick like the gauge steel. Oh, you know, they don't make cars like it know it and that that is so boxing. It's got such good angles to it. Yeah. Could it really fits? Well, Listen to various. They look fucking incredible. You remember the way unlike a level 7 like how those things are. So yeah it offset the gravity of the earth. It was a fucking have you like those things are so heavy and so top-heavy it.


That was the other issue too. You're not going anywhere fast in those things. So if you need to get out armored up, right so you must have like steel plates at the bottom of it. It's all built from ground up. So it's not as if you have a steel plate that you can remove or something or that's been Tro with rotten it's built on the factory line for it to be an armored vehicle. So this is a major time military guys, or do they make them for like dictator know they make them for for for every really rich Pricks or dictator X or military. Whoever it is. It doesn't want to get blown up. Yeah, and you can take I think it's something like three rounds of AK-47. So 7.62 by 39 and a 3 inch square and that's through the entire vehicle.


So when you're getting When you're getting lit up in one of those it's it's at 1 it's a it's an interesting experience that you're never going to forget. And then to you you're feeling pretty good. Especially if they're shooting at you with AK or just like whatever I'm going to have a snack you guys keep going. You've been inside one while it's under attack. Oh gosh. Yeah. What is it was like just Tink Tink Tink Tink Tink ya some tanks and obviously, you know, your job is not to stick around and kind of absorb the rounds. But that the a level 7 is what it's called. And so when you're in a level 7 armed vehicle that's getting shot at by their 7.62 by 39 or you know, increase the the caliber of rifle or belt-fed.


It will absorb a certain amount around sometimes it'll be loud and sometimes will be really muted and quiet depending on just where it strikes. Yeah where it strikes how it strikes. So if it's striking an angle if it's perpendicular to the round, where is it hitting? You know, so how close are you to the shooter? How perpendicular you are to the round? How big is the round so it'll kind of it'll sound different depending on where you're at and you can kind of gauge like, where's that coming from? How much weight does it add to the overall truck? Oh gosh it is if you were to put your finger in one of those levels seven doors by hand there get it trimmed off. You'll get it trimmed off. Whoo, and that's a really weird factoid about level semen's is you never want to roll down the windows and you really can't on a lot of them.


So yeah. Well your teammates farts It's the worst because you can't open the door roll down the window. You're like really dude. Yeah, you can't go through Chick-fil-A drive-thru and one of those things, you know, you can you could get I think you hit the window down about this far give or take but it will also take it. It'll also take a finger off. If you lend a roll up the window the window is going to be three and a half to four inches thick that's how big it is and it's not glass. It's a it's a plastic essentially or some type of plastic that you can see through and you You can see through looks somewhat like glass if you get close to an armored vehicle, how many dickheads Wilson this right now going I need that in my life. Oh, man.


I need one of those a lot of companies that do that they take like Tacomas or Tundras and they outfitted with level 7s. I mean, I think that's just kind of bad ass. One day. I won't doesn't that a Dev Rollo company do that. Do you like you know that company did roll. Oh, oh, yeah, that's talking about. Yeah, they do the that plastic coating on the outside with such a called the the hard plastic coating on the outside. Like synthetic Kevlar. Yeah, it's like this hard plastic the it's like a forget what it's called. There's a usually use it for undercoating some cars, but these a lot of cars they do it on the outside as well. And then they'll do a whole bulletproof treatment of them and then they well they say those things are like $500,000 to the pretty expensive expensive.


Would Jamie go to Dev Rollo. It's they'll do a 700 horsepower engine options and all kinds of crazy. Shit. Well like when you look at the will call it the Mercedes there it is. You'll have sometimes you'll have a V12 twin turbo V12 in a Mercedes that's got to be six 700. We let's go to reports go to their just their model range where the model ranges. Yeah, and then go to the Predator all own limousine. Look at that thing. Yeah, let me go limo, but the Predator I think is their top of the line. Oh, that's that's that's their F-150. They do an F-150. They also do a tundra but that there's that line that shit on the outside line X.


Is that what it's called? Yeah zones. Yeah this line X. Yeah. Yeah. So this is really durable plastic that you can't scratch or Dent. So now that you're in Texas, is that going to be your Texas truck might have to Deb XO they call it devex. So it's like a version of Line-X. I'm sure right. I think it used to be called Lennox. Yeah, things are mean-looking. I like it. That's dope also. Okay, so it does there do it for Jeeps to there? All they do with there we go. Yeah, it's Line-X. Guess they've been Mercedes. Ew, what are you doing is discussing unscratched able but it looks like shit they look. Okay. I guess it's kind of like a matte looking but the texture yeah, I've seen people do that with jeeps and shit.


Oh, yeah. I think Dudley did it to one of his daddy. Yeah. I think he's cheap was just at the office. I think he's got some kind of lion Acts or something. I don't know. I just saw it. I just saw in Utah. I didn't maybe I'm just that I'm probably just imagining I'm on my mind and not been paying attention. Now, we're looking at so many different things when we were up there. Yeah, but that so this company does that but it's like I think that was like there's a lot of like Rich Russian guys drive around those things. Yeah. It's kind of a rich Russian thing to do. Number one. Ballistic are in USA. Yeah, if you're rich Russian chances are someone wants to kill you. I would say that's a really high percentage.


So so when you got out of the military, how long was it before you started Black Rifle? It was started basically the same time for coffee in this area. Yeah. There's still coffee in there. What is this? What kind of coffee that is that Cinnabon that I roasted special for this for this place that Ethiopian shit these Costa Rican. Yeah. Would you think that Ethiopian bomb-diggity really, I love it. I'll I was turned on Ethiopian coffee. I had this guy Peter Giuliano. He's a coffee expert. In the day ahead of my podcast like a few years back. I was just interested. I was like what like what is it like these key people that are really into coffee. I started reading about people who really in the coffee. Like I want to know what the fuck is going on.


Like what is happening like these real heavy coffee nerves because I would just get coffee and pour cream in it. And then I was into like MCT oil and grass-fed butter and coffee for a while. But the problem with that is people in the podcast got so annoyed with me going after every 30 seconds and because you've got all this Grass-fed butter and MCT oil in your throat, right just like coats you and so I got this guy Peter Juliano come on, and he just explained to me the whole thing. How all coffee came from Ethiopia. Yeah, and then and then the difference between wet processing and dry processing and coffee rust and all these different things. Well, we went down the rabbit hole for like 3 hours. That's the knowledge I have for coffee.


It's so similar to Wine, right? You have the wine connoisseurs that can taste all the tasting notes and all that. Then you have the average consumer that Buys body boxes to get drunk or yes, the caffeine. It's very similar where if you go down the rabbit hole I Kevin specifically with everything cigars with everything. This just dorks that take it to the next level. Well it and I think that the for every one of those whether its wine or cigars or coffee or whatever it is, right and which is a site total sidebar story, but we might as well which is as I went and had dinner with Crowder one night. We went to the cigar bar and he's he's a hardcore Cigar Aficionado. Like he's really yeah, and so he was taking me down, you know cigar street with whatever he's doing and I was taking him down coffee Street.


And so the geekiest conversation in in America was taking place between Stephen and me as we're trying to eat steak and this this bar in Dallas not too far from his office, but I think for every one of those like you actually find a niche subculture of people that are also share you You're you're saying passion for just obscure details and things so when you're talking about wine or coffee, you do have some type of common kinship, I guess because I I get it. I totally get why people are into this one little thing and they want to go as deep and as interesting as they can.


I totally get it because I'm like that was coffee. I never get bored of it. If I go to Panama or Guatemala Costa Rica coffee is so fascinating from every aspect whether we're looking at it from a historical the the international historical consequences of this entire commodity whether it's Commodities trading whether it's growing and processing the future of coffee. Where is it headed? How are we you know optimizing the growing process so we don't run out of it whether you're looking at it from a roasting or a drinking all of that you can go as deep and as detailed as you want and it doesn't get fucking boring I can have the rest. Life ever thought about farming in me.


Is it possible do in America? I can you do it in Texas? No climates is not correct. And you know, it's gonna out of Hawaii, right which is fucking fantastic. I love Kona coffee. Yeah. It's a some really amazing flavors that come out of the big island for whatever reason right this oil. Is that what it is? Yeah. It's a soil. So when you have the high lava or but let's be honest. That's not America. No, why is not America? It's crazy. I mean, I love I love who I don't get me wrong, but they should be they should allowed be allowed to be their own fucking country. They're there. They're an island in the middle of the ocean. It's five hours by plane from America.


How the fuck is that America? I think they should be protected by Ameri. Sure. Don't get me wrong. Yeah, but the idea that that's regular America, but come on man, Hawaii you up. There's a specific. Look Hawaiians have regular that Dude Looks Hawaiian. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. What does a guy from Iowa? Oh that guy. Iowan no, no and the way that it right fucking crazy that that's America. Yeah, plus you kind of don't want America to fuck it up so it right because I keep it out there. So like none of the American politicians can fuck that thing down to the point where we can't go out there and at least enjoy it and in a peaceful and it in a way that's beneficial for everybody.


We've done they've done an amazing job of not fucking it up. Yeah thinking about how many people come there, you know, like every year people are constantly going to Hawaii. They've somehow or another managed to keep it together. Well, I think it's pretty much America's like vacation spot. Where will I put take that island? So, you know, we have bachelorette parties we can just roll out there sit on Kauai for a couple of days and drink, you know Margaritas it the thing I was thinking about when I was flying out there, which is really kind of a morbid thought in some ways where I was thinking about all the fat that is flown across the ocean so they can go eat more fat. The island of Hawaii and this sense of like just people and the Obesity of just generally flying seven hours landing on an island and then essentially sitting and eating at a buffet and then flying back and I was thinking about the fuel that's being utilized to cart just general fat back and forth.


That's what I was thinking about when I was flying to Hawaii in January and fat and booze. Yeah that & boos how much booze gets consumed there so much. Touch with me too. When I go there. I just immediately started drinking. I don't drink during the day here like very rarely but when I go to Hawaii like the moment I land fuck. Yeah, I went by but you're like, it's 11 a.m. Yeah exactly. We got someone an umbrella. Yeah something with a pineapple slice in it. I know let's party. Yeah, I fucking love it there and it's my favorite honey destination. Oh mine too because it's a great place to go to get tuned up for like elk hunting. He gets so many opportunities when you go to Lanai and access, right?


Yeah, and like ethically like they have to kill those things. Like there's no if ands or buts about it. They bring in snipers on a weekly basis. They have 30 they have 30,000 dear plus or minus, you know, they don't really know they're doing overhead surveys and shit on an island with 3,000 people and it's tiny you been no. I haven't bro. It's Bonkers, but you're there at nighttime and you hit the flashlight hit the headlights and you just see Thousands of eyes. Yeah you like. Whoa. This is crazy. Well access breed like Hogs as you know, and I think a lot of you don't know in like Texas with the Exotics hear what happened over the last, you know, whatever hundred years is the rains and storms wash out the high fences and then you get the axis that escaped and now they're like rampid or I live in Hill Country just now or way.


I mean, they're they're fucking everywhere. There's almost more than like wild Whitetail. My wife saw an axis near our house ever been right next to my house the way here we saw about a 34-inch axis and about I don't 30 females out there in the field on the way. Wow, and the crazy thing with Texas is they're considered Exotics. So as long as you have a hunting license, there's not the regulations like there are and the season with white tail so you can it's they're walking groceries, which is awesome because they're like, they're so delicious delicious. That's so delicious. They consider elk Exotics here. Yeah. This is so weird because elk used to be native. They used to be native here, but they were, you know extirpated and then now that they're back again.


When there is good because they're not standard for taxes there now considered Exotics. So there's no like hunting season for Elk out here. Have you immerse yourself in all like the Texas hunting culture yet? It has only been here for a month. Okay, it's wild man because you go to haven't even said y'all you haven't I've tried it. It's an it's an ill-fitting shoe for me in my vocabulary. I can't use it. I'm like a cultural of my I'm like, what's up bro from SoCal y'all and Shred the Gnar The y'all - had been are y'all but the hunting out here is crazy because like some of the higher fence ranches and we're talking tens of thousands of acres and you know, if you ask them like, can you shoot a drafter like everything's got a price tag?


Oh boy, and I mean anything goes but I'm not true the giraffe. No. No, I know but apparently the wish there. I have a friend shot at the Rapture RAF and he says they're fucking delicious. Really? Yeah. They had to shoot one giraffe. Right? So here's the thing about giraffes. They are like every other animal they want to control Reading right so every other male large male wants to control breathing and when you have a large male giraffe that fucks up all the other male giraffes like okay, we got a real problem with this guy, right? And so they had to take out this giraffe. So he was in Africa at the time and they shot this giraffe and the ate it and he said it it was unbelievably delicious do they reference what it tasted? Like, I'm an imagineer at I would imagine it's got to be in the Deer family right like something like it dinosaur.


I want what What family is De RAF and I have no here's my thing on it though. I'm not eating anything. That is so friendly when you go to the zoo a baby can feed it. Right like my daughter. I video of my daughter when she's too I was holding her and the giraffe comes with his crazy tongue and takes the lettuce from her hands and she's laughing. I mean, they're just to chill man and they're the only animal that I have no problem with it the zoo to ice have a bit about it because every other animal does do you like let him go what the fuck is this? The giraffes have no problem with that sense like another day. Has no liens. I just stroll on over to where the lettuces feel like. That's how they talk. Very proper. Yeah, that's how I think oh Yeah, I got a couple of those which is hanging.


Do you have Ochopee know what a pretty animal though? The Ochopee? Wow, that's beautiful. Have you seen the zedong's here? Is it a zebra donkey hired? They cross pollinate and it's got zebra legs and then a donkey body. It's super weird looking although Jamie. Yeah, because a lot of those animals if they get out like as you don't cross over then you have like, you know Red Stag and Elk can actually make together and make a hybrid cross Breeze. Yeah kid that cool, huh? But that's a infertile animal, right? Yeah, I believe most hybrids like that how it is a pet. Wow. What a beautiful thing. What is that fucking thing with the giant Leo we do that cocksucker.


That's good. Whoo, have you guys of those think that's a walk to Sue? I think you can Google that watch considers. How what the fuck kind of neck? Does it have to carry that around? Look at that head gear. That's it. Just a Florida. That's a Florida airboat. That's a lot. That's a walk to Sue. It's like it's very similar to a Texas Longhorn but they got these really thick horns on them. And actually that's like a sprinters in the eyes right there. Right? Wow. It's a y in there. It's like wa y TS you or something hmm. I don't ask me. I can wild-ass looking animal. Well, Texas has I did a bit about Texas Tigers. There's more Tigers.


Yeah activity in Texas and all the wild of the world. Once date more Tigers than all of the planet and they're all in dudes yards riddle me this do you think after Joel exotic the the increase of Texas? Holy shit like this. That's if you saw it showed me that a bug that's Avatar. That's fair, right? That's in a movie. Yeah real. Wow, one of that with that thing tastes like it tastes just like how I've had it. I like how that's your phone. I like one. What the fuck man? I like you. That's Joe's first question, huh? I wonder what that tastes like he denounced like cruising through everything doesn't taste the same.


That's true. I've had people that have never had a dog before and I serve it to them now like, holy shit. I'm like, yeah. Yeah. This is the real thing you feel different when you eat it you like who you like you feel pumped up because it's so filled with nutrients and yes vitamins and everything, you know feels like Alpha Brain for your body. Yeah, there's something to it. There's definitely something to it. There's a reason why there Running away from mountain lions all the time. That's why I don't know if you ever tried it. I haven't taken like beef like grass-fed organic beef like liver pills and stuff. Yeah, I do that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I had a company hook me up and man. I take that in about 30 minutes after I eat. I'm like super charge if I just meant like a B12 shots the weirdest thing and I think you gotta like work your way up and dosage.


Yeah that guy Paul sell Dino carnivore MD. Yeah. He sell I think it's heart and soil supplements. He sells grass-fed. Beef liver beefheart trachea college and I think all that shit. Yeah Trevor does all that Trevor Thompson. He makes yeah that shit, right? Yeah Trevor super health conscious. Yeah, I believe in that hundred percent. I mean, we're human beings are supposed to be in organs when wolves kill right. The first thing the the alpha does is eat the liver the other will stand by and wait in the alpha eats the liver. It's the most nutrient dense part of the body. You can keep it. Do you keep your liver when you I'd love liver. Yeah. I think it's by liver at the store.


R2 I buy calves liver like when I run an elk liver or I love heart-to-hearts delicious. Your heart is my favorite. My brother Alicia's oil like fried a little bit. It's delicious and an elk liver is like it is yes big as this fucking table. It's so big so enormous enormous organ. Yeah. I've always looked at the last couple of years. It's interesting because people go why are you keeping that? It's funny because I'm, you know, pull my knife out going through, you know as Field dressing it and like I we need to keep the heart and liver and it's funny because people some people don't like some people have what the fuck are you doing? I'm like man. It's really good. I want to one day shoot a bison and then cut the liver out and squirt bile on it and eat it raw because that's what the Native Americans did apparently was like their favorite thing to do.


Really? Yeah, they would cut the liver out and cut slices the liver and squirt bile on the liver and eat it raw. I want to taste that. I want to know what that is. I'll do why just like salty I guess yeah, I mean they had all sorts of, you know ways to get nutrition that we're sort of not just natural but like instinctive, you know, like the liver like today. We don't necessarily eat liver the most if you like gave a survey of how many people eat liver on a daily basis. It's like probably not even one tenth of one percent right but back then it was like really important for nutrients because you know, especially if you live in on the Plains and the winter and there's there's no vegetables.


You're not yet any vegetables, you know. Like the Comanche basically lived off bison, right and when they would shoot a bison that one of the first things they would do is cut the liver up and eat it raw with bile on it. I want to know what it tastes like. Yeah. That's my favorite part about living in Texas is I live bunch of next to the hillbillies and I mean that in a complimentary sense, but like my neighbor, I don't know two months ago was like, hey man, I just killed a bison on this Ranch. I got like extra me and gave me like a hundred and fifty pounds. Oh, that's nice. Organic Bisons that mean I love it because everybody's killing shit around here. And yeah, it's so good. Well my studio in La I had three commercial freezers. So when dudes would come over I'd give everybody meet. I gave me two people that you would you know, never think would be out there eating elk just never put your freezer on the GFI switch.


I learned the hard way in my in my garage if I switch went off and I didn't check my freezer for like four days ruined three axis. And one at White felt I would think the three days it would still be Frozen not in the Texas summer in the garage, but if it's Good see like a really high-end freezer. Probably not. I think I've got a case one that first time when my my neighborhood caught fire a couple years back and I had a freezer commercial freezer in my garage we had evacuated but my friend Bud stayed by and when the firefighters were in the area I said, hey man, I go go into the freezer I go that meat is still going to be good and pull it out and serve it to the firefighters.


So they felt they fed like fucking A hundred firefighters kidney. Yeah, it was awesome. That's not hundreds of pounds of meat and right and it was but it was still frozen. Yeah, it was still good. That's crazy a good seal for like a Yeti cooler right those fucking Yeti Coolers, man. Yeah. They are the shit. You can take one of those coolers filled with ice leaving in a hundred degrees Sun for five days. You open that bitch up there's ice in there. Yeah, it's crazy. It doesn't make any sense. Well, it does make sense. But it's just shocking when we were when we were I would row down this the Middle Fork of the Eminent in Idaho. So we do like 560 trips and I would pack shitty coolers with dry ice and ice and they would last five days.


So even with the Yeti cooler a little bit of shade you can stretch that out for I don't know and you could get a week at least out of that stuff. But the funny thing is with what just meet in general as far as like one of the questions that I was I was trying to ask you earlier was when you're on that carnivore diet and you were eating nothing but meat were you eating wild meat or were you also eating some you know beef and some other things I was eating both. I was eating the while I was eating like a lot of elk which I always do but elk is very lean. There's no fat in that so I would also cook it and Tallow. Okay, first of all, so I had a lot of happy fat. I would take scoops of Tallow and try to eat it.


God would eat scoops of beef Tallow grass-fed beef Tallow and then I would also cook it bacon over there bacon. Like I'd have like four or five pieces of bacon you have it. Fat otherwise you'll get that rabbit starvation check going on, you know, like so I was just trying different ways to get fat in my diet and the easy that for a month. Yeah whole month in lost 12 pounds and I got real aggressive. Seriously. Yes. Yes, it gets too aggressive. Like I don't know throw. Yeah, I think so for sure but also, I think it's just there's something about your body thinking all it does is eat me. Right? I mean, I think like so one of the things that my friends have said that have turned And vegan is like that makes them more peaceful and calm it makes sense your grazing your fortune your herbivore now, right?


Like you're just out there eating grass and rice all day, of course like it seems like your body would be calm but on the other side of it if you're eating meat all the time your body's like we got a kill. Yeah, like it's I think there's something to that I really do because I wasn't trying to be aggressive right but I would do I would find myself like saying things that were a little too aggressive or like it's weird. It's like a world horse bucket excuse for like God An asshole today Joe. I've just been eating meat man. I wasn't being a dick but I was like a little quick to judge things like a little fat cam. It's a little too much and then it's just there was something I think there's something to that is there's and I had a lot of energy man.


That was the other thing. That was seriously. Oh, yeah all day long that was what was weird was that there was no crash. There was no crashing during the day. It's like I had extra energy was crazy. It felt weird. You know, it's like there was no I was eating no sugar. I write about eggs. Yeah, fish eggs are all that. I think that's an animal got it was anything that's an animal. The only thing that kept me from eating that way was I got bored. So I love pasta. I love your food. I love going to a restaurant and they make you nice crab cake or something. I love like when I love what chefs create things like I don't want to say. Hey, I only eat meat like look, it's just I like sushi. I like it with the rice and the I like it.


It's taste good. It's Enjoy so for that is like I could do it longer if I want I could keep doing I could eat like that forever. Yeah. I enjoy food too much. I think right but the only reason I'm motivated in life to be pretty good at business is so I can buy pretty good whiskey and be a fat fuck anything like the restaurant and by the lobster roll, that's $37. Yeah, it's cool man. Yeah. There's there's some logic to that not worrying about what food costs and just it's just there's something about it. I feel like when you go to a restaurant, you're going to like an art gallery. Yeah, it's like this guy's an artist or This Woman's an artist. She creates these dishes and then your experience there art, you know, I don't want to just eat meat all the time.


So when I go to restaurants I eat whatever the fuck I want but I think 80% of my diets meet ya probably around 80% I've been trying like, I went strictly essentially vegetables and meat for The last six months just to see kind of what's going on. And honestly, I felt really good and I shifted just to meet five or six days ago. So I'm I'm running just meet now. Yeah, so I'm interested in what you did and I guess you know, I should probably do a little bit more research, but Trevor and I want to talk about it. Well, I'm using grass fed. A lot of grass fed butter. I kept all the bones. So I'm using all the bone marrow and things like that out of my house.


And for the most part, you know the elk that I shot a couple weeks ago that thing was really fat. It had a really healthy layer of fat on it, which is more is a lot more fat than I thought that we would get those especially in the Rut. I know yeah, mine was pretty fat to it was pretty impressive, but I'm trying you know what I mean where it's you know, I've talked to Trevor a lot over the last several months on how are you feeling or you crashing at this time? How Right. He did it for a while, but then he got off of it. He said his hormones kind of plateaued. Well, he was doing something crazy to he was doing carnivore and he was only eating for like 30 seconds during the day or something where he scored himself why he was crazy.


Really? Yeah, he was he was he was fasting till like 4:00 o'clock in the afternoon. And then so he's doing intermittent fasting. He's doing it every day till 4:00 or 5:00 in the afternoon. They give himself a feed window of two hours or something like that and he he was prepping for his he's doing a couple races plus he's doing some guiding up in Alaska. So he's doing all of these kind of mental exercises plus the fact that he's optimizing his diet doing exercise physical exercise. He's got this really interesting way of kind of looking at life, but he's only giving himself maybe an hour of a feeding window at day for a while.


If you call it a feeding window, that's why they call it. That's yeah. It's a way that intermittent fasting thing is a weird sort of torture cult-like torturing themselves and just like there's benefits to it for sure right has real benefits to not eating all the time because you give your body a break and you let your body digests food and there's benefits to going into ketosis and your body goes into ketosis when it doesn't have glycogen anymore and starts eating fat burning off the fat. There's a lot there's a host of benefits it right. I'm not the guy to tell you about them, but there's also a thing where guys do with it. I want to see how long they can go. Yeah, you know marathon runners. They're just something to it. Like they want to see how far they can push it and so does the thing when you're hungry, but you like nope, not until 6:00 till six.


That's a super aggressive internet minute fastings weird to me when they eat for like two hours a day. I get it fits like 12. Yeah, but like 18 20 hours. That's that's too much for me. We would be up in the mountains cruise around we're going shed hunting and it's you know, 4:30 5 o'clock, and I got can't eat yet. Like giving you know day we just went well something now. I'm not eating till Thursday. I don't fuck around with that shit man mountains come hunting. I eat all the time. I constantly I'm not doing any intermittent fasting when I'm walking 10 miles a day in the mountains. That's crazy. When you have to I mean, I never know when the real work is going to begin, right? Yeah in I don't want to be in that position and I found myself in the position of last couple years where it's time to turn it on and and shit man.


I was on a stock a few weeks ago and it took me over an hour to move 30 yards. Just trying to move on this big bowl as slow as I could there were cows everywhere. So I had eyes everywhere looking for me. It's amazing. If you don't move fast and you have the right camo what you can get away with you can get away and I didn't know what I could get away with our I couldn't get away with and it feel like I'm doing Tai Chi or something, you know moving as slow as you can and then you never know when how long is that stock going to be and then how long is the post work?


If I if I shoot this animal how long am I going to have to track it? Where is all the work in this going to start and end? So I'm the same way. I have to eat throughout the day. I have to keep putting fuel in my body because I'm always expecting shit's going to get real like 10 minutes from now. Yeah. His hunting situations like you just don't know. You don't know if you're gonna have to pack out in an hour. Like he should be fueled up because if you get really tired and you just feel weak and woozy you could push through it in a regular day sure. But if you're out there in the mountains near the 8,000 feet and then you have a hundred pounds of elk on your back and you have to walk over this Ridge. It's going to take you to miles to get to the truck. Good fucking luck.


Yeah. Yeah. You should have prepared every gasps. Yeah. I eat man you gotta eat but But I think there's real benefits to you know, occasionally fasting and then that intermittent fasting I think human beings probably eat too much. Well, generally if you look at Americans in particular, we're fast fuck. Yeah. Well the wrong stuff to I mean, I've always made that joke when people are like having a doughnut and they're just like I had no energy in there chugging coffee. I'm like eat some fucking good carbs and meat and you're gonna feel great. It's just yeah the diet in America is very interesting to me, especially when we travel and we're with some of the other guys. They don't have the same dietary habits as Mike that's you ate gas station burritos and a hot dog.


And that's that's what you had today. It's my bill and I don't I'm not like discrediting it. It's your life do what you want but it's weird and then they feel like shit all day and you're like well, no wonder you had. Yeah, it's just too available. Yeah, it's too there's too much all the time. And I think that's where the intermittent fasting at least, you know for a lot of guys. It's it can really help because it's ultimately saying I'm not going to take part in. The ease of all the food that's available all the time and I'm going to take part in it, you know two or three hours a day or yeah, give yourself some discipline. Yeah, give yourself some discipline. Now when you're eating this all meat diet how much of what you're eating is is the elk and Wild game and how much what are you eat?


What do you using I'm using right now. I'm only using wild fish so salmon for the most part and Elk so I'm that's it. That's it. So I brought what about other fat sources? Well, I mean outside of that littl little on it and I'll get the protein by yeah, how is you know, they're so fucking addictive so good so good but I think for MCT I use a lot of MCT and I'm not saying it's good whatsoever. I just want to see what the fuck happens to my body when I do nothing, but good when I say when I say non processed fats wild meat all the way through and then stick to it for four two three four weeks and see how I'm feeling.


It does make sure you get enough fat. Yeah, that's the real problem with people and they get really tired because your body is most certainly going to go into ketosis at certain points in time. But there's also something that happens when you eat so much protein your body converts that protein into glucose, right? It's I think it's called gluconeogenesis or something like that. Right and you'll experience that too. But you're going to need fat if you don't you're going to get fatigued to get a little start fucking with you and that's one of the reasons why I got really in at a low and really sorry. A lot of bacon and things like why do you think there's such like a national misconception? That fat is bad for your body? Because I hear that from a lot of people like I don't want to eat it. It's fat. Well there were told that for the longest time they were well, first of all, there's real evidence that sugar and and these companies that made sugar paid scientists to fuck with data to put heart disease and all these problems that people are having with clogged arteries to push that off on saturated fat, right and to take that.


At away from from sugar, right and it's sugar is sugar is terrible for you sugar in their form is so unnatural write that in the form of meat is very natural. It's what human beings have been eating since the beginning of time. Yeah monounsaturated polyunsaturated saturated fats all pretty good for you just like stay away from trans fat. Well, unsaturated fats that come from vegetable oils. Like I think it's called linoleic acid is fucking terrible for you. Really? Not only terrible for you. There's real evidence that it makes you hungry. That like you're eating it and there's no nutrients in it. So your body gets hungrier. Look throughout human history. There's never been a time until recently where people got oils directly from plants in large quantities like that.


You know, if you got oil from Plants, it was like oil from avocados like natural or you got your oil from, you know, beef fat or chicken fat or things that that's natural for human being right these saturated fats that are natural your body knows what to do with them yet. His know what the fuck to do with canola oil. What is it your body's like what the fuck is right your body gets ahold of like some raw honey. Your body knows exactly what to do with it. But your body gets ahold of like fucking corn syrup and that kind of shits. Like what is this? It just doesn't make sense to your body. And I think we've gotten into this processed food thing and processed food is almost entirely like if you its first of all to Human, it's a new human creation.


Yeah, and it's it's it should never be your first choice. Your first choice should be natural foods, you know First Choice should be she left Apple steak all that's normal. You can eat that that's easy. Your body knows the fuck to do with that. But you know, you get into like seed oils and always like really heavily processed seed oils like this real evidence that that is a giant part of what's wrong with the health of Americans today is these Ultra processed Vegetable oils, they're fucking terrible for you, but it doesn't seem to me like that's a stretch in logic, right? So for just the American diet in general for us to look at the traditional food pyramid and say well that's bullshit ultimately, you know, if grains and ultimate and processed foods that is the Cornerstone of your entire diet.


You're going to have some issues you can kind of look around you don't even have to be a rocket surgeon to figure that out. Right? It's like, holy shit. Is an epidemic in the United States? Yeah, we're eating a ton of processed food and all the guys that I know that are healthy or eating Whole Foods for the most part and it's not because you have more discipline or because you have more access or wealth. I know a ton of guys that are not very wealthy the eat Whole Foods and their feeding and certain windows and they're still in the military still doing fucking incredibly difficult missions and they're really healthy. So when I look around I say well Okay, if you stick to Whole Foods and you limit your amount of caloric intake, we're not dealing in a high, you know, High intellect thought process here.


It should be pretty easy. But I think what people want is they want their easy button right there like see Jack in the Box you pull in you get a burger you like? Oh now I feel better. But meanwhile, you just forced some shit into your system and systems got a burn off all this bullshit that you pour it in there. But there's even foods that people think are healthy that are not really Good for you. Like for instance white rice is better than brown rice. Yes, like people think white rice, like I'll have brown rice and being healthy brown rice gotta be one of the biggest misconceptions out there that fucking stuff there's arsenic in but it's brown. Yeah. It's not a brown bag great. But this time it's shit is terrible for you.


Like there's a reason why Asian cultures for a long time have been getting rid of that outside that husk. Japanese got it right with food. I'm showing you this is she white rice. Mmm seaweed. Yeah all day. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, but there's a lot of countries that figured it out. We're just not one of them quit like Ultra process seed oils sugar corn syrup. Yeah preservatives would go fucking gallons of preservatives glyphosate on all our plants. Yeah, that's also evidence that like animals and I've been getting into this room really animals that eat these Ultra. Processed foods, then you eat them like animals that eat like ultra-processed corn and then you know that animal like you're getting some of the bullshit from the corn and some of the bullshit from there.


All these seed oil acids you getting these things in your body to but that makes sense to me darn. It. It makes complete sense to me when we look at what they're eating and then you're eating them for sure. Like there's really done a direct or you're not stretching in connecting a lot of complex thought there in the sense of When when people are trying to sell me on the idea like no, it's great. Don't worry about it. It's like no man, like those chickens are eating Arsenic and they're packed in, you know, right on top of each other shitting on each other everywhere. Like I'd rather have a free free range egg rather have that. I'd rather have free range chicken. It's no offense to however you want to eat, but it's just a preference of eating.


It's pretty easy. I think that that the argument comes from maybe corporate impact in marketing where They'll just Americans will consume it without thinking and go. Well, it's good because Jack-in-the-Box told me this organic. Well, I think there's any one thing in this country where there is a massive. Lack of understanding in terms of like the way people perceive what's good and what's bad it's nutrition because there's so few doctors that really know what the fuck they're talking about. There's doctors out there that will tell you don't need supplements. You don't need supplements. You need a healthy balanced diet and then you look at them. They got a gut they look bloated.


They look like they're dying like fuck is going on. I just typed in brown rice first white rice just to see what would pop up and like the all five six articles that come up say the opposite of what you guys just said, That's good for you that brown rice has a bed advantage over white right-handed if we Advance Nutrients and antioxidants and when rice is empty calories. Yeah, white listener rice is basically just carbohydrates. It is just carp is just calories, but the the shell of the brown rice is not good for you. But Google what do Google this? Brown write the negative consequences of brown rice.


Yeah, I think it's not necessarily nutritional thing. There's something and you get a lot of vegan propaganda in these articles that are written by these people like the one I went Google a company. I've I get food from sometimes not to like I'm paid by them, but I'll do do me a favor Google Google the negative. Well, that's what did I say the negative impact of brown rice negative Health consequences of brown rice that's got to be Cross the border with food because it actually just listening to a doctor discuss this. brown rice brown rice is the brand of German tag, both of which are responsible for giving the high five with the bran germ. Also, irritate the digestive tract even suggested problems bloating diarrhea constipation leaky gut syndrome.


It's got that Source usually Times of India bad, right but these are racing with her. I'm get all my back from Wikipedia. Not the best source that we would start with. Well, that's the problem. Like, where do you get that's why I was trying to say, so I just type WebMD. He's usually pretty good. I just typed in brown problem with brown rice. Go that Just Fitness what is that? Here we go. the problem with brown rice dies and she often says people should eat brown rice did to do majority of proteins and brown rice. Also be reported high levels of inorganic arsenic, which is what I said, which is a toxin known to potentially cause liver lung kidney and bladder cancer.


Some arsenic is just naturally occurring mineral, but the inorganic kind comes from chemicals and pesticides researcher named Alan Aragon helped run to do he's a very highly respected fellow read his shit online run two different research projects comparing the effects of white. Eyes and brown rice on the body see the findings below white rice actually has an equal or better nutritional yield and also is a better nitrogen retentive effect than brown rice is also because fiber and fight what's that word phytate phytate fiber and fight take content the brown rice act as an anti nutrient reducing the bioavailability of the micro nutrients it contains since no one is reading the fucking link.


I'll just lay things out here for you. So, yeah, so The problem with things that are posted online is that there's a lot of people that want to get you to eat a certain way. Right? And they would like you to eat Whole Foods. They like to eat plant-based Foods, they'd like to eat carnivore they'd like you to eat keto and they'll try to spell things out with user bias or with, you know confirmation bias and try to like only like if you've talked to people that are carnivore based people they'll just tell you like this is the only way you should And this is why you talk to people there are vegans. This is the only way you should eat. This is why and more now than ever before people think that plant-based is the way to go.


So oftentimes when you Google like brown rice or white rice or vegetables or whatever, you'll only find the positive consequences, like it's very rare to find the negative consequences of eating leafy green vegetables, but they exist the negative comments first. Well oxalates like what it my Cyrus is old boyfriend the Rex Husband he had to get fucking surgery because he was getting these kidney stones because he was eating so much leafy green vegetable. You kidding me you get oxalates. Yeah. Yeah can have another reason why I shouldn't eat greens, but then there's other people that would tell you the greens are super healthy for you and there's all these benefits to eating greens and that a certain level of I think a certain amount of eating greens.


There's like an there's there's a hermetic effect on your body is like like certain plants have chemicals. They release to try to discourage prediction, right? So they'll release these chemicals and these chemicals that will discourage animals from from eating them. In fact, when it goes back to giraffes, there's certain giraffes that have actually starved because in this is really crazy when the giraffes upwind we're eating certain plants. The jury did the believes downwind caught the fact that they were being prepped there were being frightened and they Change their taste profile. So they release a certain chemical that makes the the giraffes discouraged from eating them.


So these giraffes hated eating this shit. It's really crazy. Like you're crazy. Yeah chemicals that Plants release they don't plants don't want to be fucking eating right, you know, like and they have to figure out how to survive. So Nature has all these strategies for survival and one of the strategies that plants have is they release these chemicals in order to make themselves taste like shit or even be poisonous. I've been hearing more and more of this and it's interesting because when I look at what's going on with your gut, right and I was just having this conversation earlier with with a retired special forces guy good friend of mine and we were talking about there are life in the military and what's happening in our gut biome, right?


What's happening with the balance of your ecosystem down here and we were we've lived this life of going overseas and and in overseas repetitively on a yearly sometimes more annual cycle in these developing world countries and combat zones were nuking our gut every time we go over there and anti-malarials anti-inflammatories all of the different things. We're just just dropping bombs in our gut and then we eating High preservative food so meals ready to eat and you're eating MREs, you're not sleeping. You're nuking your gut with antibiotics hires and burn pit.


And so now how much is happening down here and when we're talking about plant-based or carnivore paleo or any of these other things, how much is it really dependent on the individual and whether or not they were breastfed is kids how many anti-inflammatories have they taken with have a lifestyle that they are your ancestors come from our your ancestors come from I think. Any time we try to templatized system or some type of system and say oh that's going to work for everybody. Right? It's fucking might not work for any that's what super complicated about diet. There's some people that there they eat a vegan diet and it's perfect for right they have no problem with it and there's other people to get really sick and there's other people that eat a carnivore diet and they feel like dog shit.


They feel terrible they feel lethargic and I know they're doing it right or wrong but there's some people that he didn't they feel great. You got to find what works for you, right? But the thing is people are so dogmatic. About about diet there in becomes an ideology becomes like a religion. Yeah, and especially like vegans and carnivores the vegan people in the carnivore people alike. They're like the right and the left wing of America but I like the antifa and the proud boys like some fucking really are they are they fucking believe 100% and their way of life only is the only yeah. Yeah and and you know, and they'll tell you based on their own anecdotal evidence. The thing you need to know about being has there's an Number I think it's more there's a giant number of them that eat meat when they're drunk.


Oh, yeah a huge percentage, right? Yeah. I'm not gonna pull these guys out but it is interesting my wife posted holding up like six lays. It's like a year or so ago and man a vegan she got posted on some vegan page and they just went after her like I hope you f---ing. Die you this you that no like damn. She's just having a full a man. But anything on like the diet side and fitness, it's super individualized for Success because not everything that works for you would work for me. And I think to a lot of people are too lazy to figure out and do the actual effort to see what best they are and their work routine. It will cars work. Yeah easier just to say yeah, I'll be lazy today. It's hard to figure out what works for you. You gotta be real honest about it. And you know, so many people they like here's the argument for like if you get drunk and you want a PD meet, you also get drunk you eat donuts, right?


You also get drunk e like they were talking about this on meat eater. There's a podcast out right now with that pulse aldino guy that I was just talking. And yeah, they got into this and it's human beings like things that taste good but are bad for you. Right? So if you're going to analyze your diet and you're going to really do it, right you got to be disciplined. So like if you're gonna do it, you should really do blood work. You should really exercise and and write down your routines and write down how you feel after you exercise and then try to figure out what you're doing, right and what you're doing wrong and that's one of the reasons why people like the carnivore diet is because it's one of the best Elimination Diet basically taking everything out. At meat and then you kind of find out hey, you know, my body doesn't react well to this or my you know, my body has a real problem with that or some people it's caffeine and some people it's just fucking whatever it is.


It's like you had to find out what what's fucking with you and most people don't most people just you know, they go to a doctor the doctor prescribes medication. They keep eating the same old shit, but now they have chemicals in here that is supposed to offset, whatever negative stuff that they have in their diet with an interesting segue on that too because that's like in part some of the Nonprofit stuff I do on this side is is solely based on that the individualized treatment for veterans specifically in law enforcement because you see a lot with the military DOD the VA it like you're saying you show up don't feel good into blanket treatment, right? Here's some antidepressants. Here's all that but unless it's, you know, it's a Band-Aid for a bullet hole. And if you're not actually figuring out what the cause is and you're treating symptoms, then the third and fourth order effects of those treatments are going to make that individual worse, you know, some of the issues you have like, I think I have PTSD if Guy Center pts.


They go through and they find out they have TBI and 40% memory function short-term memory function. And so now you go to cognitive therapy and you get the like guys or gals working through it that way, but the only way to figure that out is through brain scans and blood work and actually focusing on the individual rather than being lazy and say, hey, here's some antidepressants when the whole time the issue is something completely different and then you have budget problems. Right? So the veterans hospitals don't have enough money to send you through all these different scans and all these These different doctors and Specialists and try to fine tune. What's wrong with you? Well, I think that that's you know, one of the things that we talked about a lot is the are our politicians will say our leadership.


They they love to go to war they loved it. Like, you know, hey, how many times can we send more guys to war how many countries you know, and I'm a participant in that endeavor by the way, right. I've been invaded Iraq. I've spent a lot of my adult life in. War specifically in both Iraq and Afghanistan, but the thing that I've noticed in my adult life is that politicians love it. They love to send you know, 18 to 26 year old men and women they love to send them to War what they hate is paying the fucking bill. That's what they hate. They hate paying for the after effects. They hate standing by their word in the sense of hey, we're going to take care of you.


You're all your health problems your education. We're going to start. Really fixing the VA system. So there's long-term care what most veterans that I know what they have to do is they have to continue to Lobby the government over and over and over for them to prove that what's happened to their body is connected to their service. But the issue that I continue to see is that this is a lack of one. It's a lack of experience for our politicians. They don't quite understand what war is and the long-term effects on. Visual soldiers after Decades of service and I think you know hundreds of my friends every one of them every one of us has some type of long-term effect from their service every one of us in this sense of do you have sleep issues you have you know got issues you have inflammatory inflammation.


Are you missing a limb and really it's disgusting the amount of emphasis there is ongoing And then the lack of emphasis on care it really it saddens me. Is this society when we have to rely on nonprofits to pay for the care of veterans. What because the the military or the dod in the tax the tax payers essentially again, I think if they understood this if they knew they weren't paying for the long-term care of our service members to the degree that they needed they would absolutely have no issues stepping up and saying hey we have to do something about Out this and it's it's really when we look at the entire system and how its put together.


There's no way that a person this is a good story from my friend Clint. He's missing both his legs recently from last year during covid. What was happening is that his leg was changing as far as the shape of it because he was growing in addition additional layer of bone where his leg was blown off and he needed a new leg, but he couldn't get in to get a new leg. So he was confined to his wheelchair for almost 6 months during this process and he couldn't get an appointment. There's no reason why that should happen because there's literally zero reason we can't have the largest transfer of wealth from a taxpayer into the military industrial complex in modern history without zero ethical argument as far as our entire political system and then not continue to care for our veterans.


There's just Way that we can do that as a society because I think ultimately that defines us and who we are collectively and it's not a good grade. What is a long history of the United States doing that? Remember when people were coming back from the first Gulf War and they were having all these issues with radiation because they use that what is a depleted-uranium rounds and they kind of denied first of all that they use them they denied that this effect was related to that and birth defects and all sorts of like real weird radiation sickness issues that people are having they were calling a Gulf War. A syndrome, but they did their very best to not take care of these people exactly. You look like from the agent orange in Vietnam Vietnam, a long-term effects of that and all the studies and research that's coming out right now with the burn pits.


Yes and the carcinogens and how much cancer but they're like, I you can't really draw the conclusion that it came from Burnin shit for six months, you know, and and to Evans Point as well. It's tragic to be honest that there's tens of thousands of nonprofits that are having to do the leg work without government grants or funding. The money is coming from people that are being, you know, participating philanthropy saying I want to do something good for these guys and gals that have real issues like to clinch that. He's missing his legs and you're going to make them be in a wheelchair for months because of its for me that's just absolutely unacceptable and there has to be change. Well, what about the story you were telling right before the show Mary about your friend who lost her arms.


Yes, but it's plain that whatever good friends Mary. She's a EOD Tech had both of her arms blown off. Off once you try to catch them ordinance that they were going to dispose of and essentially she has a full-time caregiver and she went to go see her family for I believe it was a month and during that time. She didn't have the caregiver because she's with her husband and family and they're taking care of her. Well the VA determined after that stint that she doesn't need a full-time caregiver because she obviously was fine that months she was away. And and this is a young lady who amazing person like just Nubs there's you know, she called herself wandering elves. Was her heart, she's hilarious, but she can't do things that come so easily to us like grab things use the toilet like and she has a really funny Twitter about you know, wiping her ass.


I believe she said but the fact that that's happening and someone in the VA wasn't like. Oh that's fucking stupid. Here you go full-time caregiver like that. I mean, they're just trying to find a way to cut money left and right and it's just numbers on a piece of paper. Yeah. It's numbers on a piece of paper and it's I don't think People want to be reminded right one. It's these are bad decisions as as we look back in history and we look at Iraq in particular and we look at you know, the the tens of thousands of service members at served in Iraq to include myself. I don't know if they want to be reminded of that that section of our history on a regular basis either.


And so when we have amputees we have health issues with the burn pits that really I think is are causative. The we need to talk about is our agent orange is you know, I think Jon Stewart just recently brought it up and were active in the hunter 7 Foundation, which does a lot of research in this but there's zero reason why the government is not funding to the tune of millions of dollars of research to figure out what's happening to the service members with their directly related lung and health issues from Burn pits. They're zero reason because the only reason is because if they acknowledge that it's a problem they're going to have to pay for to explain burn pits to people.


Yeah, it's a it was essentially a big pet where you would put all of your garbage everything everything. So that's batteries. That's all the plastics. It's anything and everything that is required. Yeah. It's fecal matter its tires. It's anything that is directly associated with your living condition in a war that you need to You get rid of in you'd shove it all into a pit. And then it would burn 24 hours a day. 365 days a year. Whoa, and yes we go. And how close is this to where you guys were living in every one of the fire bases?


I was at four and a half years is how much time I have on the ground in Iraq and everyone in my fire bases. There was a burn pit and not only that you're going to have young privates out there with staffs rolling it over going it out with probably some um, you know knitted fake mask at their wearing that they got and they're the ones in there actually rotating the trash to burn it through completely. So they're completely subjected to that environment from a very long time. Whose fucking idea was that really smart really really smart, you know officers and contractors the same guys that decided that you know, the invasion was going to be a really good idea of Iraq. They're the same people making those types of decisions in the way that you know, obviously when we look at this now and we look back on it we go that's dumb as fuck.


There was somebody in a series of people at that point in time in 2003 to Thousand nine and Iraq that we're saying. This is a good idea and that type of mentality I think is the same type of mentality today that says this is a good idea for not for us not to fund the research to figure out what the fuck is going on so we can do something about it. And when we talk about it, right our voices are only so big but I think if people knew what was happening with our generation of veterans because you know, I'm 43, you're 33 3434 you got all these guys that are coming up with strange cancers, like weird.


One of the Jaco's friends and our friends. He just died of cancer is a Medal of Honor recipient had a strange hard organ cancer or some kind of cancer in his back and just died six months down the road and what's happening and when we talk about the other foundations and people that are diving into some of this research. It's incredibly underfunded. Starting to have this direct connection between the burn pits themselves and the chemicals that ultimately were exposed to or were exposed to and a lot of the cancers that guys are coming when I say that they're developing I guess obviously, yeah, it has to be there's no fucking way.


That's good for you. There's no fucking way and that's in the same camp. Yeah. Yeah right there on the phone where you would have to put I would I would take a towel and I would wet it. And then I would put it down underneath my my door going into this little container will shipping container. I'd put another one on the top just so I could just so I could sleep the rest of the evening because the smoke was so bad from the burn pits as it would move in you couldn't sleep because you couldn't sleep without coughing and it was going that was every day depending on your on your Firebase. It was every day. So it wasn't a fact that hey man. I got all my fingers and toes right now.


I Seven years away where I feel like a counter-argument to that would be like well, whatever idiots you signed up for it, but if that's not an argument, I know someone say that but I think that if you're willing those people, yeah exactly if you're willing to spend a hundred thousand to a million dollars on a guy or a gal to train them up to do a specific job because you look at how much it costs to put into training and school after school after school and then they get out and we're just like have fun, especially guys and gals like we're talking to your One units. I have friends that have done 16. 18:18 deployments and it's an injustice because they're willing to sacrifice their life lemon body nice sight for you know, I guess the politicians assembly War but then it's a moral obligation as our society that we have to look out for them.


When they come back. It's not happening. It's insane that this is prevalent that they have these burn pits at every base that's fucking insane and to the for the most part. Most people don't was this Jimmy and Afghanistan is Pete more. 400 tons of waste was disposed using burn pits daily Jesus Christ. Yeah, but and then the question is like what else do you do like San Francisco fog one soldier described the smoke as thick as San Francisco fog every doll that like pollen dust then color of smoke could be blue and black or yellow and orange. However is mostly black everyone inhaled and ingested it it was absorbed by their skin fuck which is which is interesting.


Eating because you know, I think a lot of people that have deployed if you said hey, we got to get this trash burnt. You know, we got to do it like what we signed up for it. We got it, but then you got to give them the research and the medical clinicians that understand this going forward and after the fact actually hopefully not die like this. No no no. No, you gotta not do that. No, I agree. But I'm saying great in this but there's no way you would say. Hey, let's let these guys breathe in this shit and then take care of them. No, you should not burn that shit who should have got to figure out another way to get rid of it agreed. Anybody from landfills are fucking terrible. One of the things they're finding out in these when they're doing these satellite overviews. Is that methane like magic like they're trying to find the like the largest sources of methane and what's contributing to greenhouse gases.


It's fucking landfills right landfills where you take all your food, they pour it into the ground. They just covered up with dirt and it's just leaking methane into the atmosphere. It's fucking terrible. Like I don't know what the solution is, but the solutions definitely not burn it right with his soldiers are sleeping. No, and I think that Now that as we continue to evolve hopefully as a society and we look at the way that we deployed service members overseas. We've at least identified this as a problem. But the the big thing that I see is we have to continue to look at the problem fund the research and look at the direct connection between these types of activities meaning burn pits.


We're looking at burn pin I'm saying that's burn pit, but it's also know I know Tim obviously, he's been on the podcast these SF guy. I'm an SF guy. But when we look at the long-term effects of will call it the the Special Operations Community because I'm am obviously from that subculture but sleep deprivation anti-inflammatories anti-malarials burn pits multiple rotations pts. This is a holistic health issue for the most of these guys returning if they don't have direct or visible combat wounds they Have some type of residual they've been affected by the war in a long-term residual way and I think what happens is the VA continues to evolve at least pass.


These wars we have to look to look at it as a collective and say how do we make turn everybody's attention within the VA system to directly take care of these guys in a very positive and impactful ways. We don't have people like married egg that get denied. Died and full-time service give her caregiver because wow does that stand now? Is it still the way it is right now? It was like five two days ago. I haven't talked to her since I'm actually calling for but yeah atleast give the resources in the funding necessary because I'm sure via is an organization wants to do good. Correct as you great things. I think that when people just say the VA sucks, it's the wrong way to look at this. It's the way it's how do we critically think and solve the problem and put in process in a plan to go.


Here's the resources you need so we can fix the issues that are Right in front of her face. Yeah, I couldn't imagine being a v a bean counter or being someone who works for a VA be encountered who gets the call that you have to like cut the budget by x amount. So figure out where you going to slash these benefits like and then you have to look at these people that you're talking to either on the phone or through email. You can't even look at them as a human. You got to look at them as a number on a ledger. Yeah, that's crazy. It's crazy. And then you have, you know, incredible giving nation that back fills that need. It through nonprofit organizations. Yeah, I guess my only intend and that conversation is I think the government needs to do a much better job of leading the conversation than being towed around by the entire conversation.


Then you get out in front of it if to take responsibility for it and I think that's the big one which is taking responsibility for, you know War just in general and then taking responsibility for the after affects the individual soldiers Sailors Marines post-war. It just seems to me the thing to do and I think most people if they realize these things were happening. I think the last time I tried to schedule a VA appointments going to take me two hundred plus days to get in to see a physician, you know about a shoulder and drink really yeah, so it's different than 200 days to get on the list and I'm going to be special.


I'm not I'm not, you know missing anything right, but there are a lot of people that have Been directly affected by this that need care and now we have the ability. I think and based on the the current Administration to go see a primary care provider outside of the VA, which I think was a huge step but there's still a lot to do right and there's you know for us having this company and what we're doing with it, you know, it's a big it's a big part of the mission of how we run the company what we're doing with the company. It is a huge part of our mission just in general. It's something we do. Every day and it's awesome. And I think that's one of the reasons why people love you guys so much. I mean it's the amount of support that you guys have out there in the public.


I think it destiny that picture when I was in Italy and that guy was in yeah Mainline. Yeah, the guy in front of me in line with a Black Rifle coffee t-shirt on like. All right, man. It's there's something to what you guys are doing that resonates with people that it's not just a coffee brand but it's a coffee brand that supports First Responders military veterans and it means a lot to people I think because of that. Yeah. I think it's something I'm Really proud of with the company to is giving them more like visceral understanding and perspective of the veteran experience because before company kind of the commercials and stuff we did I think there was a very singular perspective. What a veteran was It was kind of the chest beating, you know, chiseled Navy SEAL and tattooed bearded. Yeah and one that exists. I think that it's good to shed light on.


I mean your tattooed on my hair today, sorry, but like bring Like to the community that there's so many creative people and Veterans or humans. We're just yeah, we're just Americans and they a lot of a lot of these guys and gals have other professions and they're talented they're artists there and I think humanizing that a little bit allows people not to look at veterans like the two ways that I've seen a lot throughout the years or your there Captain America or you're a pill-popping depressed veteran that, you know goes to bed every night beating your wife your like. I ninety percent of us are in the middle of just people that want to do hopefully normal people try to do something. Extraordinary things in the name of free Society.


I think there's it's just a cool thing that people like supporting companies like yours that do have a great message and they do do good things that it's a it's a nice aspect that that you guys can put that message out there and people understand what you're about and and that this is a company that was really started by two guys who are veterans. I mean, it's a big company now, but really just came down to you guys and your love of coffee and just deciding to do this and then start doing good with the money and People love that man. They really do it resonates with people a lot. You know, I mean, I've had Black Rifle t-shirts on before and and people talk to me about it means a lot. Well, I mean, we're thankful. That means a lot to me because we wouldn't be in the position. We are to kind of focus on the things that we think are matter and support the organizations that we do and I mean, I mean, I think that's both of us has and user and end-user experiences exactly what we want to have a great quality product and something that motivates people to wake up in the morning and kick ass and they didn't purchase it.


We wouldn't be here doing what Trying to do this also. Think about with you this like with you Evan you're so it's so obviously authentic like there's a video of you roasting coffee with a frying pan over a fire like you're such a dork with the stock. It's so obvious. It's real. I mean, I love people that geek out on shit. I just fucking love it. Even if it's something that I love coffee, but even if it's something that I don't even love I just love when people are really into shit. It's very contagious. Well, I did it. Super fun as I was talking to earlier, right? It's I'm really fortunate just as as a you know, an adult in America right now so many different ways, but I get to I get to do this coffee when I say I'm in coffee every day and I get to I get to explore any piece of the entire aspect of coffee anytime I want and get his detailed into it as much as I want, but the thing that I've found That is just as interesting.


If not more interesting than coffee is is the company gets bigger, you know developing our ecosystem as a company. We have 400 employees now, right? It's a it's a bigger company 50 plus percent of them are veterans and as I look at our ecosystem and how we support different nonprofits and what we're doing on the company. It's it's an incredible High it sounds like commercial, but I love seeing This incredible high quality product because I love going to these countries and Central and South America working directly with the farmers and then pulling it back through and then uniting the customer and the company is one in this really fucking cool ecosystem and it wasn't something that I started out.


This is early thinking about where you know, I wanted to be in charge of a company of 400 people. That's not what I started out to do. I literally He was roasting coffee in my garage because I was trying to find something else to do in the CIA told me that I couldn't work for them anymore. Right? Like fuck like why did I tell you couldn't work for him anymore, man? Hey, you know a wide variety of reasons, you know, I worked there for nine years. I deployed probably seven out of those nine years. I was an angry, you know, and I'm and I don't want to say that, you know is directly my fault.


But the organization that I started with and Iraq and kind of went from Iraq to Afghanistan and left later. I was I was tired and burnout and I was fucking angry and honestly, they had probably every right to tell me to hit the road in. I'm glad that they did the end of the day. It was a wake-up call wide variety of reasons. I was callous. I was emotionally unavailable. There's a fucking laundry list of things that were broken. And how did you get past all that? You know, I met my wife in Denver and we got pregnant and I hate when guys say that we yeah, she got pregnant.


No, I fucked my wife and she got pregnant. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and I really thought about it. And it was it was hard for me to think about it, but I was most fearful of not being able to love my daughter because I didn't have the emotional capacity to do that. And it was eye-opening who's actually very scary because that's not the kind of person that I wanted to be and then we've all seen examples of people who are that and then realize it later in life. It's the saddest thing in the world is when you see a parent and then they have a grown kid that They fucked up.


Yeah, you know because they weren't because they did have all these other problems. They never dealt with and then it's too late and then you have this angry child who you were never there for and then you like fuck exactly I looked at it and I knew in order to be a loving father a good husband and a good man. I had to change a lot of shit if I really had to have a very difficult. Call series of conversations with myself and give myself a lot of fucking tough love and starting a business was one of the things that I needed to do because it gave me I couldn't work for anyone else after that.


I was kind of done with working for other people. I was not necessarily searching for purpose, but I knew that I really wanted to do something with coffee and you know wide variety reasons that I love coffee. Coffee Black Rifle was in a mosh to my service rifle and I found myself wanting to teach myself a new skill. And then what I wrote was a mission statement in my mission statement for was just a mission statement for my life in general which was to transition out of government service and live a happy and fulfilling life had nothing to do with money, you know, running a company or hiring people.


I just wanted to find Be happy and fulfill myself outside of being a Commando or a CIA guy. Whatever that definition for myself was but more importantly is I've continued to develop myself and I'm not saying I'm even close to being a template for anyone. It's a constant. It's a constant state of evolution to be a better man. Man there and I also knew that all the lies that I told myself up to that point, you know, I'm a Green Beret.


So, you know, I'm less than 1% aisle and I'm a fucking bad-ass and I'm this and I'm that all of that would have been a lie. If I would have been a bad father all of that would have been meaningless would have been garbage. It's just propaganda every one of my combat rotations every one of my friends that is has been Killed or maimed in this war it would have been a complete unjustifiable lie to myself to say if I don't be the best man that I possibly can be and work on it. Now then all of that is for naught it's all shit.


So I I've literally after my first year in business of his sitting in my garage. And I had sold everything that I don't you know, and I was chips in on this entire thing and I didn't have anything left to sell. I didn't have as living this shitty rental. My wife was packing boxes and roasting coffee and I was getting kind of down on myself as I was a crying on this Pelican case in my garage. and I it was a distinct turning point in my life where I said Get up.


Stop making excuses. Stop being a fucking pussy and do something about your life. And when I say that like that's the conversation that the exact conversation I had with my f myself and I've had that conversation almost every day and the last several years about just how can I continue to develop this ecosystem that meets my mission statement for my company that quite literally has nothing. To do with money, but how do I continue to be positive impact in my environment versus negative taking away or you know contributing to toxicity which is man.


I don't want to have anything to do with that life anymore. There's a lot of people that have they have a problem with the way they are and they make a decision to change but they fall back into their old patterns because it's comfortable and because they're they're used to that. So, how did you overcome? Avoid doing that. Like, how did you how did you make real change? Well when it's recognizing it, right? It's kind of recognizing that you have an addiction when you have an addiction, you know, when you have emotional or anger issues in your you know, you're just angry or whatever it is for for no real reason.


I think one you have to recognize you have a problem and I think You know, I've continued to recognize that I have a problem and it it's like quitting a habit or anything that you're doing whether it's quitting smoking or working through a very disciplined diet. It's every minute you have the ability sometimes every second you have the ability to make a decision and have a conscious effort to focus on Improvement and when I feel myself because there are times when I feel myself sliding backwards a little bit into more of negative 7 and we do it all the time in this is one thing I will say about the guys that we have together is it's not just myself.


It's my friends and in the military, they're called sounds so ridiculous, but it says it's like we have our battle buddies for a lack of better term, but Matt and Jared our other partner. We formed a team and the other people within our company that formed a team we can talk to each other in a way. That's very candid. We can emotionally expose. The other thing is is Matt and I will do it all the time if we're talking and we're talking about- and we're grinding ourselves into a negative whole like stop stop right now.


We got better shit to talk about pull ourselves out dust ourselves. Is off and you can't if you're by yourself, it's much more difficult. I think when you have really good friends and for us we're business partners. I can be that guy for him and he can be that guy for me and Jared can be the guy for all of us and we have really good friends. We have good business partners. We have good people in the company that they hope they really do and leaving one culture one subculture of You know really tight-knit special operations group of guys starting a business by yourself is difficult enough, right?


It's very I would imagine it's extremely difficult Endeavor doing it without your friends and people you can trust and people you can rely on I can't even imagine because the things that we've had to go through in the last several years and the reminders, but Matt won't let me be a shitbag. It's just not possible. He won't if I start Being a ladies get ready for like a week and I was like you get a hunter fucking work, but it's true. He won't he won't let me be a shit back and I won't let him be a shitbag either in the sense of if I seem Dragon if there's something going on what I call him, like what's going on.


How you doing? What what can I talk to you about? So I think One it's focusing on yourself identifying you have a problem looking at every minute and every second at times depending on when it is on how to be better and then building a building a supportive team around you that understands what's going on and how they can continue to get you up and we've had to do this for a lot. We've had to cut a lot of toxic people out of out of our lives like we've had to cut some toxic people out of our Lives because he just negative weight though. He back that's probably been the most challenging thing for me over. The years has been there's always going to be extraneous influences that impact you but I've had to change environments about five different times and find the right team for me and that you know, my core competencies work with theirs, but I because a lot of you have asked us over the years and how did you get the team like what we went through seven different teams, you know toxic relationships or ones that just didn't mesh well together and the hardest part of that is just taking that leap of faith and saying well this is going to Really weird, but I'm packing my rucksack.


It's what I did. I had a good life. I was making a lot of money in my business at the time. And you know, I didn't like the direction things were going and haven't called me and was like, do you want to do you want to jump into Utah and let's go and I packed up moved out of my house broke up with my girlfriend at the time drove to Utah and my Tundra and one bag and said well time to start over it twenty six seven years old and I completely start over. I live in an Airbnb for six months and I think at face value that was terrifying but the second I landed in, Utah. And that your B&B and I was like fuck all I gotta worry about is the one bag of clothes I have and going to work tomorrow is something that I'm passionate about and that I love and the rents paid. So we're good. And from there on like I've just chased that feeling and then all the toxicity that kind of has impacted my life with relationships just get out.


It's also gonna help that you're doing a business with friends as opposed to do in a business with a bunch of corporate dorks. Yeah, you know, I see people that are involved in business and I see the conversations They have and it's almost like they're speaking some strange language some fake language. They all get together and talk corporate talk and then they get out of there and they take these big they take this big deep breath and they have a drink of the drive home because they're they're living bullshit. They're living a lie all day long. They're pretending to be someone they're not I call it the Ivory Tower syndrome, you know, it's they just blow hot air and don't do anything and then they don't believe in their mission and I think that's been the most impactful thing for us is we Leave in it and it's easy to be authentic in or communication style between the team and and again the hardest part is probably maintaining that cultural ecosystem in the company, especially as you scale it because you want people to be Open Candid radical transparency.


Obviously, we're not saying, you know, making fun of people but we want to be able to say Fuck. Let's get this done instead of well, you know, and that's why I think we've done so well so far is because we just stick to the mission and grind it out and we were all kind of bunch of knuckle-draggers there. They're dumb. We just out worker intelligence intelligence. Yeah, and I think to your point, you know, maintaining Mission Focus, you know, all of these things that we learned in the military right missions, right your mission statements maintain your mission Focus radical transparency, you know, I'm a zealot at the end of the day. I love coffee. I love the company or whether the ecosystem and it's easy for me.


I can go in and high five everybody and we can joke. And in the company, we have an incredible atmosphere as far as the ecosystem of the company. I love going to work there. I would hate to go to work in a really good in a corporate environment actually hate the word corporate. Yeah, because it's it to me. It just says this is stodgy spreadsheet driven bullshit where you've got a bunch of people that pontificate about things that they have no idea what they're talking about. And what they want to do is they want to run unaccompanied only for the prophet versus the pursuit of authenticity under a real Mission.


I there's a huge difference. I've stepped into corporate environments a lot and especially like Finance guys are some of the worst fucking people ever in the sense of you know, they're not funny. They have no sense of humor. I've told Bankers to get the fuck out of my office when I like 15 minutes late just to get some like payback and how many times that they've screwed. Good people over so the the company itself in the sense of any company and how you kind of create that environment. I don't like this standard corporate templatized system that people work through it's it's really it's confusing to me as well.


Because you know, when people are fake, you know, when you're having a conversation with some executive and he's like, oh yeah Suze your An incredible asset to the company. It's like you don't know who that person is. It's inauthentic it's fake and I would hate to go to work in a place like that every day and most people do. Yeah. Yeah, that's that's a giant problem with human beings today is that most people don't have a purpose. They don't feel good about what they're doing. You know, that's that Thoreau quote most men live lives of quiet desperation. And that that is real man. That's really what a lot of people are going through every day. Just Not having any real real connection to what they're doing where they feel good about it.


They feel like they have a purpose. They feel like it makes it like they're they matter like they really do matter, you know, and then when a lot of these people and they wind up getting fired by their company, you know, after 30 years of working there and they realize that they didn't they were nothing they didn't mean anything. It wasn't important. It's devastating. I think a lot of people like kind of come to like that social construct and like this is what you have to do the 9 to 5. And of thing, but not to be a fatalist but something like my positive mindset like we're all born terminal the second week. I'm out of room. We're going to fucking die and I've always wanted to be super proud because you know, I think there's certain aspects of the former jobs. I had you have to kind of agree and be comfortable with the fact that there's a high probability of dying and or life changing events and I think once you realize that it's not a matter of if it's going to happen, it's when whether that's when I'm 60 and have a heart attack where I live to be.


Andy or I die tomorrow and that drives me every single day because I look back and go I don't want to miss out in this fucking crazy thing called life, you know it you have one chance to like live this cool fucking experience whether or not you believe in an afterlife or not, but we're all going to die and it's very bizarre for me that people don't take leaps of Faith because it gets so trepidatious in everything that they do and then Global what if and they hate that uncomfortable feeling these fucking punch it in the face and go get it but the problem is roots. You know people they grow roots or before they know what they actually want to do what I mean by that is look you go to college, right and then you have student debt. So these are Roots right now. You have to pay off that student debt.


So you have these obligations, then you get a job and maybe you lease a car or maybe you get an apartment. Now you have Roots you have you have bills you have to pay you have obligations that you can't shirk so you meet might maybe you try to save so you save a little maybe receive 10% of your income every week. So you put it away put it away in your Is how quickly that goes away you have taxes and then you find yourself five six seven years in you like I want to make a change, but you have all this shit that you're paying for and then you reward yourself for this terrible job that you hate by getting a new car or maybe you buy a fucking boat or what, you know this people do and then you're 38 and you like God damn it.


I fucking hate my life. But now maybe you have a child. Maybe you're married. Maybe your wife doesn't work anymore because you know, she's pregnant you like fuck like what am I going? Going to do with my life and you find yourself stuck and you you take pills you take antidepressants. You do something. And this is this is the story of the American life that is Untold in. This is a lot of people's existence. They find themselves in this meaningless path and then they hear about guys like you and they get excited like we maybe I can figure this out and some of them do and some of them start a business in the garage and some of them get together with their friends and say let's let's partner up. Let's do something and let's take a chance. Like let's plan and two years from now.


We'll make the leap. Let's start it online. Let's do something and that's the that's the real American dream is finding Independence being Your Own Boss finding something that you really love instead of just doing a job finding a job that actually means something dude. Yeah. It's like finding the excuse to do it. And I think there's two Avenues there. You can always find an excuse not to do something if you look for the excuse of why you should your outputs going to be So much better and I've had that conversation with people what I say. I just don't have the time you can always find time to work out like you want to be your fitness goals find a fucking retention band in the Kettlebell will fuck you up. Trust me give me 30 minutes and I think that's applicable to anything and everything.


If you want to get into music, you can find 20 minutes in the day or get 20 minutes less asleep to practice your guitar or learn graphic design. I mean the opportunity is out there especially especially with the technological are like everything's free right now. You can go on YouTube and become a master. Any any technical skill for the most part you might not have the accreditation of a degree, but it's there the informations there. The only inhibitor is you these I don't have the time people don't know what the fuck they're talking about hate that I can find you some folks. I can find stuff like my friend. Cam Haines. Yeah that motherfucker Works a full-time job eight hours a day and often runs a marathon a day, right and then he goes at home and then he shoots his bow for hours. And then he lifts weights. So shut the fuck up.


Well that and that is people that find time that's like over and over and over. Are you know, it's cam like I love following can because guess what it's nothing but positivity comes out of its mouth. He's freaking a rock star when it comes to all of the things that you just mentioned guys like that exist. We don't have to be you know, a Goggins or a Haynes or a Dudley or any of these guys. It's a matter of hey man. You want to make some changes you're going to have to also risk a little bit too. And that's one thing we're gonna have to experience this matter you're going you're going to have to suck it up. I heard a little bit, you know, if if you want to have stronger legs, you'll squats aren't the best fucking thing in the world to do, you know twice a week or once a week?


I don't feel good. If they don't feel good. That's the way your legs get strong. Yeah, we get stronger don't grow from being comfortable. No, it doesn't work. That way. You've got experience that awful feeling and that's why most people don't grow. That's one great is they gravitate towards Comfort on that's one thing I will say about this is, you know combat to me taught me so many different things about me. Myself, but the one thing that I taught me was that life is finite in in order to live in order to live. You got a risk you got to risk it and you got to suck a little bit, you know for the payoff at the end, you know that last minute of light that you have in this in this world.


You don't want to be sitting there doing an audit of all the things you should have done. That would be the fucking worst. That's I really the only thing I truly truly fear in life is to be on a death And go I should have done this. I mean, I'm sure they'll be small things. But that changes that's the driving force everything in my life is I don't want the regrets. Yeah, not even a letter. Okay, you know that this is the things where it's like I want to jump out of planes. I want to you know experience it foreign language. I want to I want to go to war when you look at those things a younger when I looked at them as a younger man. Now look at them. Now, I'm not going to be you know, whatever age it is thinking back going man. I really wish I would have been tried to be a Commando, like I've already got that now I can focus I think a lot more my energy on how do we you know become a better father how to become a better business owner a better friend, but I didn't leave anything on the table the previous 20 years.


I didn't leave any of that shit on the table going man. I really wish I would have done that now man. Like I push it as hard as I could with is with whatever was given to me. Like I did the best that I I could with what I got. And and honestly, I'm probably about it. I'm operating I think it about a hundred fifty percent right now. I'm overextending what capacity I have up here to judge. But it all together like it's honest like I'm just trying to fucking run it as hard as I can because the machine that I was given is like I'm very fortunate. I understand that but I got to run this thing way past its capability to get the most out of it. Now, there's some guys that you may either phenoms and they're much more intelligent.


Agent than I am that would be you know, one of the things I joke around I say is like man, I'd love to be an astrophysicist. Unfortunately. I'm just not that bright. So I'm gonna have to settle for what the fuck I'm doing, but would you yeah. Yeah the theoretical this is would be fucking awesome. I love to do that. I don't know. No, no, I think you found the right spot. That's I think people find the right spot. If you if you put enough attention to what you're doing and you gravitate towards what you love you find the right spot. Yeah you do you do I used to think that I was a giant Because I couldn't work a job because I was like, I'm just too lazy. I'm just too undisciplined. I really used to think that and then I realized like oh, no, I'm not lazy. I just hate things that suck.


Right. You're probably a creative. Yeah. It was same as me once. I figured out like things that I love I'm like, oh look all son. I'm not lazy anymore. Now, I'm obsessed and I used to think I used to think that was a weakness that like, oh, I'm not disciplined. I'm just obsessed. I'm just a crazy person, right? So if I find something that I like I can get really good at it because I'm crazy. Daisy right and then I realized like oh, but all that shit that they tell you about like ADHD and being hyperactive not being a pay attention. That's actually of energy right? I don't want to sit in the fucking chair when you're 10 years old while some person who doesn't give a fuck about you or what they're teaching is is rambling on in front of you and you're just going crazy. Can't wait to get out of there and the you know, and the doctors like this just man needs to be on some medication this young man has problems paying attention.


Well, he should he should but he's got a goddamn chance. Can maybe he can fucking rock it out of this system, maybe he's got enough energy to get away from the gravity of this bullshit that you're teaching them everyday. So instead of saying like oh this this girl needs to be on medication. Maybe that girl has a goddamn chance of escaping the hell that you live in right? I couldn't I can't agree more in that. I think all of us have this like ball of fucking energy and it zaps everything around us. And if you try to point it in a direction where it doesn't work, like I could never be a finance guy could never be a numbers guy not a metal any of that. I am too fucking ADHD. D but what that allows me to do is think in the clouds and be super creative and write and build content and music and all these things and we had a really cool exercise in the business.


We did kind of like remember when the created problem yet creative problem solving and we all had to take this like pretty intricate test and it was the best one I've ever done but it pretty much kind of tells you where you live as far as if you're like in ideator a developer and all these characteristics of your brain and that's kind of how you build a team because Evans like an implementer. He's like get this fucking shit. On and I'm more of like a ideator where I come up and develop ideas, but then I don't have the follow-through least on like the business side. And so learning about yourself just because you live in the clouds doesn't mean that you know, you have ADHD and you need to take anti freaking whatever it is. You see we have this terrible idea of how to how to develop human beings.


There's not a kid in the world that wants to the desk eight hours a day. There's not a kid in the world. It's not normal, but those they do great. There's a big system for you, right but we've exam I don't Maybe them they probably like like it doesn't mean that you can't be an accountant or an astrophysicist like but you need activity. Yeah and children are deprived of activity most of the day I and I should have been out like portaging boats on like really nasty out here, you know and in British Columbia somewhere by some asshole dude, that was you know, here's 10 minutes worth of work. Now, you're just going to work you into the ground and when I say At its that's that that's the level of I guess patients that I had for any of it in the sense of you.


Can't sit a kid at a desk at least kids like me for six or eight hours a day anybody in this room, buddy. Yeah. My daughters are my daughter six years old. Now. We're just having this conversation about school is VTC because of covet and she's 6 years old and you want her to sit in front of a laptop for six hours a day. You should watch. Watch those classes are we that in? Well, my ten-year-old was at school and I watch how the teachers talk and I watched like what was going on like holy shit and she looked at me she goes. Yeah, she's looked up. It's so far. They just talking monotone. Well in Texas they let him go to school right? She's in school here. She goes to actual school, you know and my 12 real goes to school next week.


She was doing video for the first couple weeks and they're easy to back in the school. Look this is this is a travesty these kids are at they're getting a specially kids in public. School systems especially kids that have working parents. This is fucking devastating devastating devastating and it's going to fuck up their development for years to come because like if you if you like if you took six months and didn't learn anything for six months that fox are your development. Well, guess what? That's what happened. Yeah. That's what happened. A lot of these kids are not learning shit and they're sitting in front of the laptop. They're barely paying attention. You can't expect kids to sit in front of a laptop. Like what's terrible it's a terrible idea and It's a terrible way to experiment on kids which is you're pulling this out of your you know, you're pulling this out of your ass.


Yes. I think this is going to work. Let's put them in front of a laptop and we're going to sit in there for six or eight hours a day or whatever it is. We're going to give them a lunch break. It's having this conversation with my wife. Like this is a horrible idea that they're experimenting with kids. Just ultimately you have to give them some type of pre-existing assignments, but you can't sit them in front of a laptop. The other thing is I don't want to teach my kids how to In front of a laptop for six hours a day to give them the discipline to do that. There were telling my daughter chair the eat lunch. Yes laptop what the same thing if the yes March in front of the laptop. Yes, they have to see you eat lunch I go. No, you don't I can let me talk to the teacher the fuck out of here. You don't have to eat lunch from the laptop comes come sit at the kitchen table.


Let's talk. What's like the desired outcome in that form of Education Services. They're assholes. They don't know what the fuck they're doing. This is all making it up on the go. Yeah if they could just Justify in some way that a kid should eat lunch in front of a laptop instead of eat lunch at their kitchen table. Like why? Why should we do you could see them eat lunch the fuck out of here. Yeah, and why why would you ever think that that's acceptable to do this? And what's all the teachers don't have any oversight either and some of these teachers are so bored. They're so bored and boring and and I've watched to talk rude to the kids like this is gross. This is so bad for them.


Wait at least now. The one shining star I will say to this is that hopefully we come out of this with the ability of some type of home schooling system that actually works because the one thing about homeschooling for you know, the nation is what's the one stereotype of homeschooled kids. That's we've all kind of religious psychos. Yeah, they're weirdos right weird like yeah, but now we're at least living in a time where yeah, hopefully this catches up and we can educate Kate children from our home and maybe a balance between the home in the school. Yeah, it gives them some form of adjustment that works for them.


That's the one thing I will say about this for my God. This has been a good thing for from from a perspective of from in my life, which is I don't travel as much I've chopped a bunch of travel out of my schedule. My wife stays home with the kids. I've been home with the kids way more than I have in the Five years in it's it's forced us to look inside the family a lot more than you know on the go constantly driving outside of the family doing things outside of the family. It's really forced us to be I think a much tighter family unit with the with the four of us and I'm always trying to find the positive in it regardless, like I'm not there's plenty of negative out there.


We've all talked about it and hear it on the fucking news every day. I will say the forcing function and all of this is made my family. I think tighter much tighter. All right. I hope it has for a lot of other people, but I know it's been very detrimental to a lot of family units to because they have a lot of financial they have a lot of financial issues. They have, you know, domestic violence issues, but for my family, it's really forced us to look inside and really work on us and so I can say we're going to try to Out of this much better family. Well, it's like all struggles right some struggles make a better person some struggles destroy you yeah, and it really it depends on what the struggle is and where you're at when you come into it and I think for a lot of people this is a real eye-opener about your health.


I mean and that's what I'm hoping that more people pay attention to your body. There's a direct correlation between your health and your ability to overcome diseases and I really really hope that that message gets out there and that more people understand that if you are Are obese if you are obese, if you do have a bad diet, these are things you can handle you can do something about this and this is the wake-up call. Please like fucking take care of yourself because it may be the difference between catching the shit and living through it and it may be in some cases breezing right through it. Like I have a bunch of friends that caught it in like got a call for a day. What the fuck is going on like quite a few friends that had a cough for a day.


Yeah and felt like shit for two or three days afterwards and then we're On with it and we're working out five days later. Yes all my healthy friends. Yahweh to their athletic Breeze through it off a little bit kind of felt sick one day and the next day. I was fine Paul Rodriguez. Okay, who's a friend of mine? Who's a comedian? He's I mean Paul's got to be in his 60s, right? He was famous in the fucking 70s Paul Paul. I tested everybody and we did this comic store documentary and I test it by he was the only one who tested positive for the antibodies and I go when he think he got it he goes, I don't know because Because I think I had a cold in February. He's like he had a cold for a couple days and he was he does. You know, he fucking parties rights in the city.


He's not out there eating wheat grass and fucking doing squats. He's having fun and he's a comic, you know raised a real old-school comic getting down partying fine walked it off, you know, I mean what the fuck is going on, but for people that are unhealthy, I just really hope that this is this is the wake-up call. Take care of your goddamn body. Are you help me take some vitamin D and zinc and c and just make that a priority make it a priority to whereas if you got sick you're not worried. It's interesting too because a lot of things that people rely on as far as substances will absolutely go away. If you follow a healthy diet and exercise routine.


I mean the Euphoria and like what how I feel post workout is one of the most amazing feelings I've ever had. So it's not only like a bodily function. It's more it's a cognitive. As well just all the endorphins you get your like. I'm ready for the day and then you feel accomplished. I mean it's like incremental success makes great success and those little wind throughout the day and I think working out is one of them more people need that feeling of fuck. I feel good. Yeah food is probably the most overused tool to deal with anxiety and exercise is the most underused tool to deal with depression and yet those two things like food will fuck you up if you just eat two quantitative cool calm yourself. Yeah, and actually Your size will help you in a gigantic way if you use it to deal with depression and anxiety and everything.


So let me let me ask the question though, because I've heard you talk about it on the show, which why is it that we can't have that National conversation? Why do you think are we just had the presidential debates last night, but why is it not debate that was fucking I put it on my Instagram. I'm like, you don't need me. You need Big John McCarthy and McCarthy. Yeah. Is he resting here? But he's though he's like the most authoritative UFC referee because he was a cop right here is he's wandering over there over there. Like he fucking controls this situation, you know, he would have controlled that man.


Yeah, why can't we have the conversation because you can't be mean can't say hey stop shoving sugar and fucking saturated bullshit and fucking oils and vegetable grease and all that crap and fucking All the nonsense the people stuff in their face. Stop. Stop doing that your fat fucking you up. Yeah. There's a fucking picture man from like the nineteen early nineteen hundreds of a guy at a carnival and he's the fat guy at a sideshow. Right and he's a normal fat guy for today. Right if you looked at this picture and like, you know, they have disappeared it lady. He was an exhibit. He was so fat the people like, holy fuck.


Look at this guy. Could see when Disneyland was open you can see a hundred of those guys rolling around on scooters. He's a normal person today like a normal overweight person because people didn't have the access to bullshit back then like to get that fat was hard right when you don't have that kind of sugar in your diet, you know that the amount of gluten and Grains and fucking nonsense that people eat today. It's so easy to get that fat but back then it was really hard. See if you can find that picture Jamie. I had typed it in and I found a On a giant fat guys. Yeah from back then. Yeah, but see bubble find the one that was the guy was it was in a sideshow. I don't I don't know how to find the particular are old huge alive.


712 pounds will go to the one in the upper left hand corner. Look at that guy that guy you could find anywhere today. Yeah, you can you can cruise down that was a sideshow guy. That's the sideshow guy back then Harold huge, but that's a drawing. Unfortunately the herald you pounds look at that guy up there go to that guy up back above that go to that. Guy right there that guys fucking right down the street go to the barbecue store. Yeah, there's a store restaurant guys waiting in line for more bread. Yeah. How do you change that? Right where if you say something like that, you'll have people that are heavier and say you're fat shaming and and yeah what I'm doing, but yeah, that's how you feel. Bad. You feel bad if someone fat shames you and then you make decisions that you can't fat Comfort.


Well, that's the thing with that. That's nothing what for fat man at the circus Jesus Christ. Is your tail right there the subculture that we grew up in right in our 20s when we are 18 to 20 30 whatever it was like man, we have we would have guys slapping food out of your hands and going fatty because in the mill back in the back in the day and I'm not saying back in the day, right? I guess it sounds makes me sound old, but I don't know enough to say that. Yeah, we're washed up enough dude. You can fat shame the shit out of people and that's just the way it worked, which was Hey fatty and if you weren't meeting at A task or you know task condition standard you'd have guys in ncos noncommissioned officers in your chow line selecting your food for you.


Ya Goin dude, you're going to eat this you're not going to eat this and then people would go to eat something in the literally slap it out of your face go you're you're you're not eating that now there's these open discussions and in use you read it and all of a sudden we're bad people because we want The be healthier if we if we say hey that person is obese or that's fat and that's unhealthy. How did it how did this turn to peace people trying to be nice? Because two people that's all it is. They think it's good to be nice and it is good to be nice. But the reality is when you're mean the someone about certain things that you actually can change because one thing is like you say to someone you got a stupid fucking nose man.


Like Well, it can't do anything about your nose. But if you say to someone like it, bro, you're fat as fuck and then they have to feel that like, oh my God, I hate being Being fat make a choice make a choice do something. Well, is it better to be nice to someone about that? Yes, most certainly. Is it better if you have a friend and I've had friends at Apple decides to listen, man. You got to lose weight. You gotta do something lose weight. You know, how many of them have done that zero? Yeah. They don't listen like the only time it ever works is when the person decides that they want to make a change and often time that comes from Pain and often time that comes from being mocked. And yeah, it's not nice.


It's not nice to put Fab. You know, what shame some not nice is dying a diet. Yeah, especially if it's coming from an apathetic for empathetic personal position. You're like I'm saying this because I want you to live which means I like you but the thing is people are lazy and when you tell them that they're fat all people like to consider is like you are shaming a person because of their body shape and that's terrible and that's awful. That's true. But if you also say to that person, okay. I love you I care about you, but I'm going to be honest with you. You're fat as fuck and you need to lose weight. That's also fat shaming well, but this is there's very few ways to get through to someone if someone is drunk if they're a fucking alcoholic and to get drunk every night and you pull them aside and go.


Hey, man, you are a fucking drunk and you need to stop you need to get your shit together and they feel bad because they love you. I got Evan says I'm a drunk. I respect to Heaven. Fuck. What am I doing? God damn, I gotta get my life together. Somehow know that. Okay, but telling someone that they're fat fuck is not okay because you're fat shaming will because you're making them feel bad because of their addiction to food versus their addiction to alcohol. Like what if you see someone smoking every day going. Hey man, those fucking things are going to kill you. Are you cigarette Che me like what are we doing? Here? True? Haven't told me I have his drink little too much whiskey at one point. I said, you're offending me. It's you're being you're shaming alcohol shaming me that he actually told me that he identified with somebody that doesn't drink at all.


Yeah. It's like I identify as a non-drinker now none. Fine is this whiskey identifies as water? So your argument is invalid Evan. Do you know that they're using gender neutral language in the seals now? Yeah, I called out it made it all the way to the seals. I sense a Jocko and I sent it to Goggins and I was like, what the fuck is this shit? I was the same. I I was I was texting or talking to Jocko this morning because they did you did you read it where they consider gender neutral it. You can identify as him or Her it's there. They've changed this entire. I think it's a that get in there. How'd that get all the way to the seals? How did someone knock say Hey fuck you.


I think that it's the same way that most of these policies kind of they bypass logic they go through some type of bureaucratic mechanism where somebody thinks it's a good idea. And typically this is going to be an officer that's looking to be promoted off of some Merit where they're going to go. I'm going to Change this this is going to be a good thing for my career because this is where I'm going to hang my hat on this. I'm going to look for grabbing a look Progressive. I'm going to look really good for the rest of the company's gonna resonate with the rest of the culture. Yeah that we're living in right now people going to go even the seals are being Progressive jackley than that. I think that's how it happens when you gunned down the bad guys.


Were you with a forever? What were you fox Ridiculousness of it? I mean, these are like trained warfighters. Difficult jobs on the planet and we're going to bring you know bureaucratic like weird fucking bullshit into it. It's like no we are training them to do the world's worst act which is kill another human being in hopefulness that it's saving more human lives. I mean, this is not a PC job, right getting trained with hand grenades rocket launchers guns to put night vision on and sneak into houses and shoot motherfuckers in the face and the danger is wrecked. If you do make it politically, correct, you're going to cost us service. There's lots the problem and then if you bring all this bullshit into it, then you're decreasing the survivability and the training that these guys and gals need to succeed and be a high functioning unit to live.


You know, this is not a game of like sensitivity. This is the game of life and death and people say, oh you're exaggerating. It's not going to cost people lives to be polite and use non-gendered language. Now, this is one step on a fucking greased up hill. Yeah. And and this is what happens if you let that shit get in there. It's going to be like people To say like what? Why does anyone care about what goes on in college campuses? This is not happen in the real world. Stop worrying about like leftist ideology that's permeating in school. Well, look at what happened in Seattle. Look what's going on in Portland that shit bleeds out into real life. And if that shit bleeds out into the seals you got real problems. Well, I I think that's a really good point from the entire War fighter when we look at the entire war fighter across America.


We have a very small subsection of guys that carry the Lion's Share of the war fighting and you know, the Special Operations Community the Infantry in the combat arms. So when we look at that, that's a really small number of guys and to Matt's point. It's the most Politically Incorrect profession in the United States quite possibly in the world because what you're doing is you're taking human life. You can't have these two things. You can't beat. Lyrically, correct and shoot people in the face. You can't have both I'm sorry America. You can't have the two you have to have your War Fighters that are out there, especially when you're America, you have to have the guys that are trained to go out at night and do this every fucking night and take it to every terrorist every bad guy internationally to protect you and your sleeping beds.


You have to do that. You can't have a politically correct War fighter knock knock. I'm sorry, you identify as a as a as a, you know, politically correct on violent terrorist. I guess we'll move on to the next house. That doesn't work. It's completely illogical. You can't fight Wars with a politically correct attorney. And guess what? They're not politically correct? No fold that you're opposing these fucking dictators and these all these different terrorist. Relations, they're not playing by those rules. If you play by those rules your handicapping yourself it is and it's just it's just nonsense. It's nonsense. Yeah, and those types of you have no regard for human life, you know, and I've seen it personally when politics get involved in Wars it kills people.


I mean, I have a few instances where there were, you know, you can't drop ordinance on guys. You just got ambushed by because the local Village said you can't use you know bombs from Planes and right. Like we one of our guys just got shot. You know, we killed the three that ran out the front door, but the six that ran out the back door. I'm just supposed to let them go live from an ethical perspective. They're going to go do this again and I hope they don't go plant bombs and blow up a whole, you know engineer vehicle and kill six Americans like where's the efficacy in that because you didn't want to offend somebody politics don't work in war. Obviously, you need rules and regulations in our OE and things that you know, but that's where the training comes in your acting on ethical basis on the ground.


But again, Don't think anybody understands. If you haven't been there how Dynamic and complex some of these situations when it's completely dark you're under night vision in the laser and you're having to make moments second milliseconds to make a decision whether you survive or you don't it. It's there's no black and white with that. It's very complicated and that goes back to the whole thing. We got to look out for veterans and post service because they're putting some very very very difficult situations. Yeah, when you're yelling at someone giving out orders, you can't ask them what Nouns, they use well and they're going to lie and deceive I mean, you know, I my team leader in squalor both got killed because of that we cut did a call out and they said no one was in the building.


They swore to Allah and all this stuff and we went in there and we got hemmed up really really bad. So, you know, there is no there's no moral like decision making on their side as far as well better. Tell the Americans. Were we are pointing in this building with AK-47s and suicide vest know. They're going to lay their balls off because they're trying to fucking kill us. When I think that when the expectation for the the overall, you know, the warrior class really what it is for them to kind of adapt to this politically correct culture. It's we've seen it I think and I've seen especially when we look at some of the other countries that we actually have caught with some of these guys have to come to United States for instance to get really good weapons training because Under legal and places like the UK.


So you'll have British soldiers. It will come over here, especially their special forces. They'll come over and train with us because they have restrictions on how often they can use firearms in the UK. So a great that's a great plan. Let's make all firearms illegal and then oh, by the way, our special operations have a hard time training with them and there's a very distinct and huge difference between the proficiency and the way that there are utilizing their weapons and the way that we do it because of our culture so Our warrior class as a society. We really have to look at it and say how do we protect them, you know in if we're going to continue to maintain, you know, our sovereignty and say the security of the nation.


We really have to create a place where these guys are not affected by the bullshit that goes on in the United States as far as you know, whoa cancer culture bullshit. We've got to protect them from this and we've also got to just decide that. These guys are trained at a high proficiency level to do something exceedingly difficult and we want to keep them. We want to keep them over there. Like there are break glass in case of war and now Wars of just Perpetual essentially so keep them separate from the rest of this because we really want those guys to be proficient so we can go to bed every night kind of rest easy. You know what I mean things you talked about about where this probably came from.


It's a reoccurring theme in Jack cars books as well. Is that this These officers that are career politicians really that are also in the military and they're really just trying to advance their career and it's it's one of those archetypes that resonates like you go. I bet that guy's real like it makes sense. It makes sense as like sort of an evil sort of bullshit artist that happens to be an officer and claims responsibility for all the good things and doesn't take responsibility for the bad things wind up getting people killed or ones it being corrupt. How often is that really the case it's it's often and we run into it and I've described it a lot as you have a group of and it can be noncommissioned officers or officers and you have What's the diff guys?


Noncommissioned officers are guys that have enlisted in the military and they either went to college or didn't go to college but they've enlisted and they've worked their way up through the ranks officers have gone to college. They've gone either ROTC. Academy and there's very two distinctly different rank ranking systems. So enlisted I just go down and raise your hand join the military work your way up. The officers are typically in charge of the ncos. That's most of the time there are some special operations unit where units where that's a little bit more fluid, but in any government bureaucracy specifically in the military, and I think even in the intelligence Community you You have you have personality types just like you do in any organization.


You have the mission first guys. People are like I'm ready to fucking do whatever it is. I need to do in order to accomplish the mission there the there are the bread and butter of what's Happening overseas and there's a ton of those guys and then you have a minority of mise in the me's are the guys that are I'm here to elevate and rank. I'm here to shirk responsibility and make That I take responsibility for others act for other people's actions and I'm here to be a careerist essentially and I'll do anything to get promoted to include what they call throwing our guys under the bus.


So 80 cents a good example, he was an officer, but he he you would never know that right. You see would never throw his guys under the bus choco is a great example would never throw his guys under the bus, you know, good leaders. Eat last they're not careerist. They're not trying to do anything or say anything in order to get promoted their mission first, very capable and driven people that ultimately don't care if they get credit for what happens and most of the time those guys sacrifice their career and their promotions because they're going to always default to what's right the me's are always going to default to what's best for me and then what happens Is those meanies start to get a they move up much faster and more effectively than the mission guys and the subsequent effect of that which you see is you had the me guys and are moving up in ranks.


And then it is a massive, you know downside to the guys that are mission first because they want to focus on their team and getting what they need to get done done and then we pretty much get out of the military because they're like, I don't like this political crap. I hear that. Yeah all the time from God. Yeah. It's a big the retention on a lot of the really great guys and gals that serve I think is directly correlated to to the me people because they're essentially all about professional progression rather than how do we do the best Mission and then give the team everything's a team effort in life. You can't accomplish it in your own really just like a podcast you need the producer. You need the book like it's a team effort and sure you have the leader but when you have the officer types and even if some ncos that are it's it, I did it, you know, and they put a lot of the guys.


At risk where they'll do dumb shit on target or it happened to me. Whereas like we did like a land sea and air movement for the sake of doing it and I was the route since um, okay. Why are we landing on the X or the Y like we're good to go like 160 is said we're in like shut up best. This is what we're doing and it was essentially because an officer wanted to use his Rangers at by land sea or air for whatever no right up that he might get a bronze star for when the only thing that happened was risking the lives of Americans and Special Operations. Guys because you just made them move x amount of clicks farther on that movement to Target which you know IEDs, why was there checks and balances to eliminate those guys or to make sure that those guys get exposed because that's what I would imagine that for the enlisted men and for the ncos and for all the people that have the right thoughts in mind and the right intentions in mind.


They would not want that to be there and I would imagine that that's the majority of the people. Yes, and no, I think that that's why the Special Operations Community has such a high rate of volunteer because they're escaping the conventional military where there's more careerism in the conventional military. And when you go to the Special Operations world, there's less of that you're more of it's more of a peer system. It's driven on the individual capabilities in the sense of this is my team everything that I do is going to be evaluated by my team and ultimately if I'm an Or that's that's messed up. I can be fired right my team can fire me. There's less of that in the conventional military system because there's a hierarchy of tradition.


Now, I think the conventional military can definitely take a page out of the Special Operations Community book and ultimately make really good decisions on how they select officers and leaders just in general because leadership is one. It's a dying. Heart in in I think just it's a dying art in general because of what's Happening. Yeah, the military has an incredible institution of knowledge on how to really curate good leaders. They do in the Special Operations Community. I'm of course, I'm biased but they create incredible leaders.


They react they know how to really curate people's talent and put the right people in the right positions and then Leaders, that's why Jocko does so well bringing that knowledge to to business and and doing all these speeches or he's so well sought after because they want to hear a real leader. They do in the the with the highest stakes in the world combat and talking about what leadership and Tails absolutely and for my example that I made earlier that was a one-off. I mean the leadership that came out of ranger battalion. I mean that I couldn't have been more thankful to be a part of that unit. You see a lot of those those guys that work their way up through the ranks and read Italian move on to Tier 1 units and do have extraordinary heroic careers and it is you can definitely take shit tell the cultural differences from a special operations leadership to the conventional and that's not a knock in the conventional because I think if you raise your right hand your epic, but I think there's some some knots to be untied with some of the leadership in the career career officers because there's a certain point probably when you pin a star you're no longer an officer, you're a politician in your appointed by politicians, so Here move up past a certain rank your essentially appointed by politicians and which now every 48 years.


Obviously, there's a rotation in how your selected who is selected for what so you'll start to see different aspects of the officer Corps shift based on administration because it's led by the administration and then it takes a few years and then ultimately it goes back and forth and back and forth. But you know to go back to your original question is how do you continue to develop that I think the checks and balances are it's a very traditionally based organization, right? The military's is is incredible and a lot of different things in one thing that there has to be is there has to be somewhat of a firewall from what's happening in the newest Trend and you know the newest Trend in social science and how It affects our military.


I think there really has to be a big wall as far as what's affecting it and what isn't and I think that as far as how we get the right people in the right place is in the military boy. That's that's probably a three our podcast and itself as far as you still unpacking that there's some incredible and not to take away from anything that's happening but but the there are some incredible people that continue to serve in the most honorable capacity in the United States military day in and day out their mission first people that we never hear about that go through 20, you know, 30 years of a career they retire and they move in next door and you'd never know what they did and Those are the guys that you know, when we when we look at the community when we look at what we're doing just in general.


Those are those the guys that I really respect in the sense of you know, we have our subculture and our friends but you know, the people are trying to earn our respect for the guys that we know. I've always served in silence that are the silent professionals that continue to do the work day in and day out and if we have their respect and we Continue to promote and different aspects of what they're doing in their mission. We do that all the time and when we do that what I mean by that is, you know, we whether it's donating money or time or all the things that we try to do we've we've shipped hundreds of thousands of bags of coffee overseas two guys that are serving the country to our friends that are in command your Ribbon units that are doing really difficult work.


And our little our little sacrifice that we make and it's really not a sacrifice or a little commitment to them is ship them coffee. How do we dedicate more time and money and encourage the good people serve the country day in and day out that are really they're the heroes right? When when we look at this when I look at the Seal team memo for instance and I say there's a guy up there that made some change because he wants to you know, get it get a promotion, but that's not really going to change. Teams, you know the teams are going to stay the same. Those guys are going to go to work every day. Just like they have they're going to be sound professionals even very difficult work day in and day out doesn't matter you fight you identify them as lamp or their them's or whose or whatever it is.


They're going to still do the mission. Thank thank goodness. They're doing that mission. So, you know, how do we just keep promoting it but that's the fear that I have of people that don't have an understanding of this that are involved in policy. Yeah when you talk about people In the military and you when I talked to Tim Kennedy and he talked to me about the Stark difference between the previous administration and when Trump took over and one thing saved good things or bad things about Trump all day long, but one good thing you can say is he gave the military the money that they needed and he let them off the leech. He didn't politicize it. He just gave them the money that they needed and they stopped Isis and a year. Yeah, and he talked about it in great detail.


He's like the difference was so Stark between the previous administration. Trump took over and having the resources to do what they needed to do and get the green light and he's like we stopped Isis in a year. There was no in Isis camps that they wouldn't airstrike because of politics and then when they transitioned over to kind of the ground force command level and said what do we gotta do to wipe Isis? They go. Here's the plan go dead. Don't that's the way it needs to be and that's the way it needs to be if you want to stay safe. Yeah. Yeah and not just us but other parts of the world when you have radical A mentalist like that that are doing wild shit man. And you could watch the videos that do get leaked. I mean, it's fucking horrific and the idea that that somehow another this these policies are dictated by people who don't understand what's happening there and not by military people not by people that are on the ground.


That's crazy. Why did I I don't know exactly what the answer is to that which is when you have professional politicians and especially career politicians that You eat, they're fundamentally corrupted by ultimately the military lobbying aspects of of our country. They're going to be driven left or right and any one of these countries and when I say that, you know Afghanistan is a really good example. How many days did it take us to overthrow Afghanistan are the Taliban in Afghanistan 150 days that was back in 2000 September October November Ember of 2001 right?


So roughly 90 days after the towers went down. We invaded Afghanistan to overthrow the Taliban took us less than six months to essentially go from north to south and that country with a small contingent of Special Operations and CIA guys roughly give or take and then you have a long-term war of occupation, which is lasted almost 20 years now and we have the Special Operations units that Invaded overthrew the Taliban and then we have a long-term we're of occupation and we have several different administrations that have continued to increase troops eyes to what reason why and then Trump like him or not is saying well, let's let's downsize our troop involvement in Central Asia or Afghanistan.


The I think the only bipartisan agreement that they've had in the Senate and the Congress in the last six months was to maintain Troop levels in Afghanistan right for what reason? Right exactly. Why and when Trump talks about this work? It's creepy. He says there is a military industrial complex that wants to go to war. They want to keep war going. They want that money endless war. They don't want the money. No one even brings it up that he says it and it doesn't become a big issue. He brought it up in an interview on Fox News. And that was it that was it and no one not until I was like No, it wasn't a giant D. Like wait a minute, you're saying we have a large contingent of soldiers over there just for money.


Is that what you're saying? Like, what are you saying? I think you know and I think personally yes, I think large-scale Wars of occupation are about the transference of wealth from the taxpayer to the military-industrial complex because I've seen it a small-scale special operations contingent as far as will use Afghanistan as the template. You can do a lot with a force multiplier and it's by with and through your local National League your local Nationals. And I think it's typically a more mature Soldier that's already has a mature and developed brain to by the way, you know past the age of 24.


Typically Special Operations guys are a little bit older and then you have a force multiplying effect and ultimately you don't have a large. Large-scale war of occupation which now you have 18 year old kids that are driving around in tanks that are flying around and you know big robust, you know C5 Logistics, but it's less it's more cost effective to do that. And it's also not as I think it's also not as politically advantageous for politicians. So people love to support and celebrate the previous administration for all the great things in it. I'm a dead.


Okay, but he increased troop levels in both Afghanistan and they say well he withdrew from Iraq but no we had another surge in Iraq after that and we surged in Afghanistan after that. Well, there's really not a a coherent and logical argument that I can hear or that I've heard in the last 10 years that you know, I've either been in Afghanistan or Iraq for a large-scale military occupational forces. Course in either one of those countries. So when you have a president that's saying I think we should downsize our footprint and you don't have and you don't have the left or the right supporting that it seems fucking crazy to me.


It seems one. It seems crazy into where where our media outlets and where are the other people saying? Maybe we should break this down and look like and look at it from the second and third order effects. Of a troop downsize can we still maintain the sovereignty in the security of the United States at it more cost effective rate meaning less blood less treasure. Can we do that? My answer to that is absolutely we should be able to do that. Absolutely, but you know why we can't because it's more cost effective for us to have a special operations smaller contingent and it's it's less it's more costly to move big Logistics, you know tanks and airplanes and Fuel and everything else.


That's where taxpayers you your you as a taxpayer or essentially paying to fund all of that and that's that's my that's my two cents on it. At least it's crazy. It's crazy that that's both Democrats and Republicans and that there's no one stamp stepping up and saying this is nonsense. We you stop doing this and I don't understand. I don't exactly understand. Why either I really don't because I keep waiting. I keep waiting for the congressmen and senators and a few of these other people to step up and say wait a minute. Can we can we decrease our footprint in these countries and still maintain security and and ultimately protect the sovereignty of the United States.


I think we can but nobody is stepping in to the shoot after Trump and essentially backing him and saying yes, I think this is a good idea. Where is the left should be all over them? They should be hey less war right. I mean this is the hippie movement like less war is good. No, you had the left fighting him over. His Syrian troop withdrawal which is insane to me that you had media Outlets that were defending the increase of troop levels in Syria. So what I don't understand like why is it just the sheer amount of money? So the influencing the politicians and the politicians all uniformly agree to go along with this with your probably a large part is government contracts, right?


Well, it's oil, you know, it all costs money missiles and a lot of those are government contracts ran by private entities and And the cash flow that goes to the government they have to subsidize and go to other companies to get what they need and and there's a lot I mean we're hundreds of millions of dollars. I mean trillion trillions. This is trillions of dollars overall scope Senate rejects Paul proposal in withdrawing troops from Afghanistan. Wow, that's today. No July. I'm sorry. Yeah, and what was the vote on that? I forget I know. Yeah, so where they agree so, you know we can where they agree. Is we need to maintain or increase or maintain troop levels in Afghanistan?


That's where we can get everybody to agree that that sounds that's completely rational. And what is their argument for it? What is there are I mean, I don't know what like especially coming from the left. I have heard the argument and it's to maintain stability because they don't want the the state ultimately collapse and cause a failed state which then puts us back into the previous circumstances. Dance where it where the Taliban content continue to increase and increase their power ultimately developing a new terrorist organization or harboring terrorists organizations. And my answer to that is you don't need tanks on the ground to do that.


You need a bunch of Commandos and if a few CIA guys this 23 provinces in that country, it's really not that big you have Pakistan obviously a few of these bordering countries, but you don't need a large scale. Patient forced to do what you're talking about. So what's so what Biz what does the large-scale occupational for serve from my perspective? It serves it serves the transference of taxpayer dollars from the taxpayers and to the military-industrial complex. That's what it serves. Now. The argument is is that they need all of this in order to maintain stability within Afghanistan. That's the argument they need all of it. That's not a good argument.


I don't think so because I so I think that they've proven that they can they can if the mission or the end State and that's the other issue. What's your success criteria? So lay out the success criteria for Afghanistan. Have you ever heard the the United States government success criteria for for Afghanistan? No, right and that's because there really isn't one in which is a fucking problem. When our leaders go to war without success criteria. It's really easy to maintain a military. A footprint for an endless amount of time because you're always chasing a new definition for what it means to succeed. There's no definition of when there's no end to it.


So why is there not minimum success criteria is something that you need to have on anything? What do I need in order for this organization to deem itself a success? The expectation for our politicians and our leaders is they have to publish minimum success criteria for any War they ever go into and then once we meet that there needs to be a post affect plan as to how the hell do we get out? So do you think essentially what happens is the military industrial complex or the lobbyists or the special interest groups they do they make agreements with politicians. Do they communicate with politicians?


And tell them what their goals are and his razor. We're going to help you. This is what we want you to do. Like how do they get them all to agree on this? I think that they have very complex way of organizing and funding think tanks the way that people think about were the way they think about stability. I think that they have access right? So when you have access and most of these companies if you go to DC, you know drive around look at what companies are inside the Beltway Way look at what companies are are publicly traded publicly traded large companies within this this type of industry and they have access and their entire monetization strategy and how they make money is requires War.


So how they continue to grow their company and profit directly is related to how much war is being conducted. So if they have close relationships with All of the politicians with in DC and their entire monetization strategy is built on on increased War D. Do you think they're working for the taxpayer and of withdrawal troops when I say that it's like it's it's directly contradictory to what I think the majority of the public would like to see I think the majority of the public would like to see a decrease footprint decreased War especially large scale occupational worse, and they don't financially benefit from that.


That they it's contradictory. Would you like to hear Trump talked about this? Oh my gosh, I would love for any politician to keep talking about this like it's always like he's at least the only president in our recent Lifetime Yes, actually brought up the fact the military-industrial complex is actually influencing these decisions. I would love to have any politician especially Trump or the president talked about the military industrial complex and how how affected DC politics is and how effective we are. Are in the dod as as a nation in funding overseas Wars and say what you want and want to say that as far as the the pro-trump anti-trump but you know a lot of the left they continue this to kind of parade around about what all the great things that Obama did he increased our work capacity overseas.


He didn't decrease it. Did he shut down gitmo? Did he do any of these things that he said that he was Going to do for a group of people that claim that they're so anti-war. The one thing that they should be saying. Gosh. This guy might have a point. We might want to decrease our footprint overseas. They don't but to contradict what we were saying earlier, the benefit of trump was that he added findings the military, right? He gave them the green light you let him off the leash like where do you draw the line? I think it's a more cost-effective way to so if you If you have minimum success criteria for instance in the case of Isis in Iraq, you have success criteria that are clearly laid out which is defeat and Destroy Isis and eliminate any stronghold essentially any in the occupied land that they have you go to work and you take it all away from and then you're done.


You leave that's what you do and that's what they did essentially a now granted. We still have Force forces in Iraq, but not to the degree that we did when we were increasing to push Isis out. So with success criteria and ultimately clearly defined goals and objectives directly Associated to any war that is a absolute expectation that we should have for any politician voting. Yes, and we should hold our politicians accountable for Strict adherence to the success criteria of any War the problem is is they keep changing every two to four years. They keep changing the success criteria will that's endless war and he's right about that.


These guys want endless war and both sides. So both sides want it Democrats and Republicans. Why why do we want endless war in these places? That doesn't make sense to me. It really doesn't and the only thing that makes us sense to me in this in this this capacity is that these guys all have a direct benefit or they're all being persuaded by the same organizations. To keep the troops and keep the transference of wealth from the taxpayer into the military industrial complex as fucking terrifying. Absolutely. It is like it is absolutely terrifying and we as a nation should be we should be having that conversation.


That's the conversation. I want us to have as a nation versus the conversation. We're having about, you know, crazy shit. I could crazy unimportant shit. That's really it's honestly Ring and I think it's I think it's a distraction in a sideshow to what's really happening. But it's just crazy that you're not hearing this conversation anywhere like this conversation is happening on this podcast and it's reaching millions of people but why is this unique? That's that's what's nuts. This is what's not says that this isn't on CBS or NBC or vice or any of these places. This is not in this long form. You're not getting this conversation. You're not going to get spelled out the way you just spelled it out.


No, and I think that there's a maybe Vice maybe like I had some pieces that I missed. I'm sure they have and I'm There are a lot of people that would love to debate me over what's actually happening you'd be hard-pressed to find people that with two guys sitting across the table that have more experience specifically in these countries working these countries. I have seven and a half years in Iraq and Afghanistan in my life seven and a half years in both military and as an agency contractor and when I look at what we do and in those in those in those Trees and I'm I'm not thinking about it in theory.


Right? I'm not thinking about in theory. I'm looking at it saying this is what I saw. This is my first hand experience. And this is what I've kind of looked and being able to reflect on it for the last five six years since of you know, that left the military in the government be able to reflect on it and really ask a lot of complex questions as to why do we keep doing the same thing over and over and over again, and it's frustrating? Because I understand what it takes to stabilize these countries. I see it. And I also understand what doesn't work. And we're doing a lot of shit that doesn't work on the hard part with that I think is there's been such a diversion away from the wars that no one's actively thinking about how many u.s.


Soldiers men and women in the military are currently deployed. Its there's so much going on in the nation and that conversation is not even happening. I'd venture to say most people like, oh, we still got people in Afghanistan and they're going out on missions and stuff and It's yeah, it's an injustice to not have those conversations about what's the end goal. What is the success criteria for Afghanistan? Because I'm sure they want to go out and do their job and they're willing to risk their lives for it. But what's the job and I and you don't really see any of that coming out of what what what that mission what the end goal looks like and if there is an end goal. Why are we there kind of thing and I'm not I haven't heard it like Ivan from friends or underground. I'm like they date they have a they have our street.


International strategic counter terrorist objectives, which is deny Sanctuary for any terrorist organization and I'm sure that we could pull it off but at the end of the day, we're occupying a foreign country with our military. We should be talking about this on a national level as to what what are our goals what are our objectives? What are what are success criteria? And when the fuck did we get out of this place? Like we should be having that conversation on a regular cycle because guys are Still time you're still spending a lot of money and we're still spending a lot of our time and lives with the men and women is that serve our country?


These people are still getting wounded and killed in places like Afghanistan and we're not having a national complex conversation about it. And it's it's crazy to me. It seems certifiable like as a country. It's like, you know when you guys are crazy you need to have this conversation. It almost seems like it's too uncomfortable for people to discuss. And particularly because it's going on for so long since it's happened since 2001. It's so long it almost it almost seems like people just it's too much. They don't why is this? I don't know. They just keep moving. You know, it almost seems like that and then obviously someone's taking advantage of that and profiting off of it. It's weird conversation. You're going to have kids that are going to Afghanistan there were from the from the first wave of soldiers that were fighting Afghanistan you're Children their children to their were born.


Yes after September 11th, and now they're now they're there to me as a guy that served in both of those countries and to me as a guy that loves our country. We really need to have that National conversation with everybody and say is this it this is a generational War everyone. Is this something we really want to continue to pay for with our blood and our treasure. This is something we really want to do. Do and I think when I obviously you know, I'm biased but I think these are the important issues that we should be discussing. Right? So how much water do we really have do we really have the patience for not necessarily the patients, but how much were is really acceptable?


And how do we Elevate and have these complex conversations without the interference of people that ultimately profit? More to which is that I think that's that's the conversation we have to we have to take that out and have this as a society and they don't want to have it the interference of people who profit from war and that is something that's happening and it's happening behind closed doors. It's not happening in a transparent way. We can clearly see where the decisions are being made. It's happening by the influence of the politicians that are being influence behind closed doors. Absolutely and if they're being influence behind closed doors are also being in influenced overtly through I would say they're overtly being influenced by you know think tanks and you know studies that are funded by large institutions that are geared to profit from this.


So instead of the government spending its time really investigating and looking at complex War plans and how we pull out of these places, you know where we're trying to figure out, you know, how we can Change memos, so we don't offend anybody. It's fucking crazy. Yeah, it's crazy. I never expected this conversation go down this road, but makes sense. Yeah lemon. I didn't either actually we started eating the right foods and beauty of podcast, right?


You just get a chance to talk. Let's wrap it up at that mean. Is there anything else? So you could say to people is there anything people can do about this? Is there anything that you think people should be aware of that there? Not other than what you just said. I think you know honestly, I don't know. I don't want to be defeatist. I think that it's one of those things and you've talked a lot about it in your podcast. I think the expectation for us to expect more out of our our politicians. I think in insourcing different different types of information from a wide variety of people I think for us, this is White Noise, right when you look at all the white noise issues that are out there we have big issues. I think you know honestly, I don't know. I don't want to be defeatist. I think that it's one of those things and you've talked a lot about it in your podcast. I think the expectation for us to expect more out of our our politicians. I think in insourcing different different types of information from a wide variety of people I think for us, this is White Noise, right when you look at all the white noise issues that are out there we have big issues.