
Hello friends, welcome to the show. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by whoop. Whoop is a fitness tracker that I wear 24/7. It's awesome. I love it. It's the best fitness tracker I've ever used it monitors your heart rate your heart rate variability and your resting heart rate. It adds all this information to its algorithm and it gives you a fantastic amount of feedback that you can use to improve your day. The Insight which provides is really Next Level. It can let you know how behaviors like taking see. D drinking caffeine or even certain diets can impact your sleep and Recovery in a way that's personalized to you so that you can understand how to better optimize your behavior for anybody looking to build healthi Smarter habits.


Whoop is a no-brainer. It gives you personalized insight into your bodies recovery strain and sleep with actionable feedback in real-time when I wake up in the morning. I check my whoop strap and it tells me how much I've recovered from the day before. It's got a strain coach that tells you how much stress Is your body should take on for working out and how strenuous your day is and you get to know really how much sleep you actually get and how much you need to get in order to recover. I love it. And whoop is going to hook you up 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout go to whoop. That's wh oop.com and enter the code Rogan at checkout to save 15% get to know yourself on a deeper level unlock yourself with whoop.


We're also brought to you by Trager grills. I cook on a Your grill four to five nights a week. It's my absolute favorite way to cook trigger grills make the food delicious and it's simple to use but it's a super well engineered machine. It's a pellet grill. And what a pellet grill is is it uses hardwood sawdust. So if you bought oak or cherry, they would make sawdust out of that and then they use the sawdust and compress it using the natural sugars in the wood to hold it together. And then you just pour those pellets into a hopper the hopper feeds into a worm drive and the worm Drive feeds it to a heating element and it just Cooks just fire and wood. It sounds complicated, but it's very easy to use and they have an amazing application application on your phone has 1500 plus recipes and you can control your grill from anywhere.


It also has recipes where you can navigate the cook cycle through the recipe on the app. It's amazing. There's 12 different wood pellet varieties big game blend Hickory Mesquite Apple Cherry. Pecan Alder Oak Maple and more trigger. His own Lumber Mills the wood pellets are made here in the good old us of a and they're available online or in 10,000 Plus stores nationwide. I can't recommend them enough. I've been using trager's long before they were ever a sponsor. I love these grills and I love the company and if you visit Trager grills.com Joe use the code Rogan at checkout for free shipping on the best grills on Earth. We're also brought to you by phone soap everyone agrees that in order to reduce this Spread of germs need to wash your hands for a minimum of 20 seconds.


But what about that third hand you never wash your phone whatever your hands touch. It gets passed on your phone phones are nasty. They get really I mean think about all the things you tell you never clean your phone. Well the best way to clean your phone is with phone soap phone soap is the original patented and clinically proven UVC phone sanitizer. They've been making phone sanitizers for the last decade. And phone so abuses UVC light and their patented and clinically proven technology to kill 99.99% of germs like E.coli salmonella and the cold and flu virus phone sub can sanitize and charge your phone in as little as 5 minutes phone soap is the only consumer UV sanitizer with a 360 degree disinfection chamber that uses two quarts plates to suspend your foam.


Making sure that all sides are disinfected phone soap as featured on TV show shark tank is easy to use it fits smartphones and cases of all size. It can even sanitize TV remotes Keys earbuds credit cards and other common whole household objects that need disinfection. Do not accept cheap knockoffs phone. So is EPA registered and trusted by Healthcare professionals around the country with millions of satisfied customers other products may claim the sanitized. 9% of the germs on some parts your phone, but only phone soaps patented technology can achieve 99.99% disinfection 99.99% kills a hundred times more bacteria than 99% That's math for limited time.


Go to phone soap.com and use the code Rogan to save 20% and received free shipping phone soap offers a lifetime warranty on their bulbs. Go to phones hope.com, and remember use the Code Rogan to save 20% off and free shipping that's phone soap.com and use the code Rogan. Yay. We are also brought to you by athletic greens a fantastic green superfood powder that I enjoy it contains 75 vitamins minerals and Whole Food sourced ingredients. It's an amazing way to add nutritional Insurance to your day with added prebiotics probiotics adaptogens digestive enzymes Super Foods and Athletic greens is one of the most complete products on the market and it's real simple.


You just pour it into a bottle of water or glass of water. Shake It Up drink it it tastes good. It's good for you and they have these little travel packs that I love. I carry them with me everywhere and athletic greens was developed with the best in mind and as become part of the daily regimen for thousands of high performers and athletes worldwide. It's also NSF certified for sport meaning they take their product very seriously consistently testing auditing and making sure that what's on the label is actually there. It's lifestyle friendly whether you eat keto paleo vegan dairy-free or gluten-free. There's no harmful chemicals. No GMOs no funny additives and they've continued to improve in this one product.


This is the 53rd iteration over 10 years. It's great. I love it. And I love also that when you buy athletic greens, they're going to hook you up with some vitamin D, which is so important for you. A hook you up with a free vitamin D3 K to dropper with your first purchase of athletic greens. It's pretty much a full free year of vitamin D. So if you're interested in upgrading your health routine and you want to use something that's easy to maintain his daily habit. I can't recommend athletic greens enough whether you're here in the US and Canada, Australia Europe or the UK jump on over to athletic greens.com Rogan and claim this special offer today and get their vitamin D3 k To liquid dropper for free with your first purchase that's up to a year supply of immune-boosting vitamin D combined with their Daily Greens.


It's some serious nutritional Insurance again. Go to athletic greens.com / Rogan to claim my special offer today. All right. My guest today is a brilliant author slash comedian slash podcaster / cool human being one of the most well-rounded and interesting and introspective people. I know please give it up for the Great and Powerful Bridget feta see The Joe Rogan Experience trained by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. Oh, hello Bridget. Hello. We're going to save the world. Yeah this right now since I'm sorry for being late for the most California reason ever I'd really I thought I was meditating for 20 minutes and I was 45 minutes in I was like what happened Last time we talked you hadn't even started meditating at so tell me about this broad.


I would do it occasionally, but you weren't most the time. I was getting in the tank. Like meditating, but you know, the tank is its own thing. Yeah, but yeah, but doing I had this guy James Nestor on. He's the author of breathe breath breath breath breath breath breath breath. The book is breath. I always forget which ones have the E of the endB But I really got into breathing exercises words. And so I mean, I'm calling it meditating but I'm really doing both a meditating and doing while I'm doing these breathing exercises. I'm just concentrating. Trading on breath. It is Debbie is the best fucking friend believer. It just all goes away. I'm a hot yoga and I always said if you could if you had to choose like all the different parts of that practice if I had to tell somebody just to do one. It would be really nice exercises or the best. Yeah. There's something about it to that like you don't realize how shallow your breath is most of the egg until you sit down you do these bit.


I do six in six out of six seconds and Mmm, and then when I did it for 45 minutes a day just in and now and by the end my my my skin is tingling. I'm like, I feel high. Yeah, it's wild. I know that's why I love the average mention last time. I was on Sam Harris is meditations because they have you reflecting on your own Consciousness. It's like notice, you know pay attention to where you're paying attention or what it's so trippy and I'll get in my head and next thing. I know I'm like this is like taking an acid. I love Sam Harris. I love terrified of covid though. Tara is he? Yeah, he's not doing anything live. Really.


I'm Sam. He's the one who had me so sad. Yeah, I got to come out and place it down. But he knew somebody though that got it early in Italy and got really sick. Yeah, but then upon questioning. I was asking him a bunch of things like the guy was drinking like the guy was partying and then he was skiing and he caught covid. So the people that I know Of got it and got it bad were all compromised. Yeah, there were all beaten down worn out and then it got them. That's where it gets scary. get our you don't know. We had a friend whose boyfriend's brother died of it and he got it but he was sick for two weeks and his wife was like please go and he didn't because he's a dude and and then he went and found out that he had like diabetes or something.


He didn't even know he had it and so he was compromised and it was really tragic and sad. But nurse was telling us shoes. How hard she yeah, she's hot guy. She's I get that. She's she's great. I love her. But anyway, when she's doing the test, she's telling us about all these kids that Vape that are yeah, I've been hearing this fucking getting pneumonia and dying from vaping. Here's a fun story. I was talking to my physical therapist and he is married to an Italian woman. So they were hearing all the stories from Italy and then And the whole thing about like Hydrochloric Hydrochloric when came out and Roxy the hydroxychloroquine, however, the hell you say it and he he had been hearing from the people in Italy that this was kind of working with like some and it was helping.


So after Trump said it was helping he was trying to get some on the West Side and he's like all these motherfuckers who are talking shit about it. You couldn't get anywhere on the west side of La every rich person. Person in La went out and bought it and then was like, oh this we shouldn't be listening to those. He's like, but you couldn't get anywhere. Well, my doctor told me that people are not taking it because they hate Trump. Wow, he'll in shop. Got it. They asked job what your political leanings are. He's like what and he's like well hydroxychloroquine has been proven to be very effective in the early stages. We are like, yeah, it was fucking give it to me. What are you talking about? But imagine if you like fuck chunks, I'm going to die.


This hill you're literally Trump people have lost their minds lost their minds. It's a I saw a tweet yesterday was like, I'm so tired. I'm so tired. I'm like, what are you this whole idea of everybody be like, I'm so exhausted like you're sitting fucking ass. You're watching Netflix. You're on your couch. You're waiting for Postmates. Like what are you fucking tired from? You're exhausted from tweeting. Like it's so hard educating all these people all these fascists online about what are you? Fucking exhausted from I don't understand - is everybody disagrees you is a fascist everyone. That's just how it is everyone and it's I was talking about Colin Quinn for my podcast and we were talking about this.


I was like do you not get shit for like he's like, I feel like we're kind of in the same place and I was like don't get shit for being like both sides and he was like isn't that insane though? Like the people who are like trying to see things reasonably are the ones who are like getting attack. He's like no the middle used to be the Looking at the zealots being like you're fucking crazy and now they're looking at us and they're like you guys need to be stopped middle because of this reason needs to be stopped. Well because you make them confront their own bias. Yeah. The problem is when you're if you're a reasonable person, especially especially if you're someone like you or I who has a platform and you reasonable and there's a lot of people listening and then people had quietly.


She's actually he's got some good points though. She's not sadness. Look, I'm no listen. La no, I don't have a platform like you guys but well, it's a real shame that her platform was a third one. That's like a really really delusional I want to this is the two plus two equals five maths. Yeah that math is that's like Hollywood math when they tell you movie didn't make any money. Yeah. It's it's really wild watching the hatred that people who are even so the other day I saw I'll say something like I've heard because I put out an article and it was like why don't why I'm not voting for the president like Fuck this I'm out and I got all these emails like 900 emails in two days from people who are conservative voting for Biden from people who are Democrats were and I'm saying like I'm hearing a lot of people saying that they've never voted for Trump or consider it and they're going to and they're like, that's probably Propaganda, I was like putt so anything you don't want to hear as propaganda.


Like I'm just reporting what I'm hearing anecdotally from people and you're telling me it's propaganda, which it is really the opposite of propaganda because the problem is the the media overwhelmingly is liberal right overwhelmingly. Like there's Fox News. And was that Aon? Wow, whatever whatever it is. This is what is one crazy network is like Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh right on the edge of the cliff with a fucking Eagle Tattoo in their back and then you have everything else. I mean everything else is liberal whether it's whether they pretend to be or not. They lean liberal whether it's NBC CBS. Yeah, MSNBC, of course CNN CNN is CNN's atrocious.


This is what they're so bad. They used to be my favorite source of news. And now I see when you see Don Lemon and Chris Cuomo talking about white people and and how like why people have every Advantage like why don't you have an education? Why don't you have a loan? Yeah, like and Chris Cuomo was just standing there like letting Don Lemons his like what are you guys talking about apparently years. Have you ever been to Appalachia now? They haven't, you know about really poor white people know they're there this poor white people all over the world. I tweeted something about crazy. They're like Don Lemons calling out celebrities and I'm here for it and I was like, Don Lemon is the arsonist standing in the house asking for everyone else to put out the fire like what this guy has been so divisive he's so Are you even talking about generalizations all of them do nobody any good now, but they're fun, but I just made one.


I know but there's some fun. There are very fun. We're comics in the world of generalization. I said this waitressing stereotypes don't exist in a void like as a waitress. That was 9% waitressing 90% trying not to profile people. That was the hardest part of my job is really it's just like, all right. These white ladies are going to be a pain in the ass these white lie, that's Fuck but the fact that you can say that on CNN you could say something ridiculously biased and in a gross generalization on CNN as long as you're saying it about the right people whether you're mocking all Trump supporters of being dumbed remember when he did that and there was this whole thing where they like said, I was not mocking them.


I really like the red he was like fake laughing. Yeah. It's like it was so not funny. It was like, what is this was like when you go to one of those alt rooms, In and someone's laughing, it's some shit that you know, nobody thinks is really funny. Like what is happening here was this weird Voodoo in the air as forcing people to comply. I think one of the things that really was surprising to me that I'm hearing from a lot of people and in my next column I kind of talked about this is like the the mainstream media inadvertently red pilled a huge sector of America during the pandemic. Oh, yeah, because they were like lock up. This is for the best shut your business down. Don't bring your our kids to school Miss funerals Miss weddings Miss graduations.


Miss portsmouth's comedy miss everything treating. Did you see the head and then they were like, oh but protests are okay and everyone and you know, how many people protested like what percentage was it like what .01% enough to spread the virus enough good solid number. How about de Blasio? He said the only protest you could do or black lives matter protest like hey motherfucker, this is America. Yeah, you can't That now you can't say this is a parody though. He how is he even real he can't be real can't be South Park mayor living in the South Park. We are it's and so yeah, I keep hearing this from people that that was you know, I don't even think there's a protest because I think most people are actually on board especially around George Floyd.


Everyone was pretty United like this is horrific. Yes, we need to address this police brutality is a problem. Someone should have stepped up though some mayor. She stepped up and said I I am with you but we are going to have a real problem with health if we just all Gather in the street like this and it's not even in the street. It's the making posters beforehand at your buddy's house, you know and like getting together afterwards and having drinks at everybody was still getting together in apartments and houses before and after these protests and it's interesting. It's just that the thing I keep hearing is not even it's not even the protests. It's the writing and when you're set standing in front of a burning building and Saying these are mostly peaceful people fucking have eyes right like you are lying to their face and I just think they overplayed their hand.


They I think you're right that CNN piece that said how the riots are being misconstrued by right-wing media while their most mostly peaceful rise, and they made that with a photo of a building on fire is it is so crazy how gaslighting that is the biggest gas lighting event. Out of our times actually just demanding that you swallow the why it's even worse than gaslighting. It's just demanding you comply with little the lie that they're presenting now we get this on the right to yes where it's like I yield directly contradicts something that is clearly on video that you said.


I'm a change. Yeah. I'm it changes the biggest one on the right whether they just full-on try to deny climate change and it's a part of The Narrative of the ideology of the right. There's a lot of people that just didn't I The Narrative of climate change, there are young Republicans who are changing this though and you should have some of them on because they're young to move I will there's some young kids who are really pushing back against they don't like that they believe that we should conserve our parks that we should conserve that it's important and they hate that it's become this kind of partisan thing and that it's now Republicans are anti-climate is this messaging and so there there are some young people in that space.


They just don't have a big enough voice really yet, but they're they're out there and they're pushing back against that and they have some really cool things that are going going on. Well, that's good because there does need to be some pushback the problem with the narrative on the right is that they're so pro-business that they're willing to sacrifice some environmental standards and people see the repercussions of that right there. Like Hey, listen, I understand that you want people to be able to work you want people to make a living and you want to raise a standard and trickle down economics and all that shit, but you can't you can't sacrifice. The fucking environment right? Like that should be a no-brainer first Do no harm right look a doctor first Do no harm and that you're doing harm like you can't make money while you're polluting like that's that's not good for anybody's future.


Yeah, they're seeing this in areas where that you know, I think it was reading like the Louisiana about there's like tons of instances of more covid mortality and they like chemical Ali were almost fucking chemical plants are and that's the kind of Untold. Stand cause and effect that we need to pay more attention to and this is why I hate when these things like the climate shouldn't be we should be able to have a conversation about this and I think with the right wing it's it's more that it's used as a cudgel to this silence everybody and you're supposed to just get on board and there's so many things that are a lot of them will agree that there we might be having some effect on it.


But what is the best way to to try and make those changes so that new? This conversation is what needs to happen and everything is just partisan everything even the mass thing like I love it and you want to be able to come from a place of facts. It's the same with you. No police brutality all of these things if we can start with what the actual facts are, that would be awesome and productive but we don't we don't start there we start with like well the police brutality thing all you get is videos of horrific actions, you know, I saw a video there's a really terrible video that's going around right now that people are using Using as evidence that cops are racist because they didn't shoot this white guy who wanted shooting and killing a cop in Oklahoma.


Did you see it? I haven't seen it. I've been successfully offline. Every time I drink coffee with cream. I say I'm not going to do that again because I do it on the podcast then I get Fleming I have to ask that's all right. It makes you human Jeff. It's not for people listening annoying bro, but it's a bad video. They pull this guy over the mace em, they hit him with the pepper spray. They Them they do everything and he's just drugged up or a psycho. Who knows and they get into some sort of a wrestling exchange and he gets the cops gun and unloads until you hear the cop you from the cops body camera. You see him get shot and he see him scream. This is the fucking thing about our dystopia that I hate.


I've seen someone die like every day for the past two weeks online, you know, where here's my point. This people are looking at this thing. Oh, the cops are racist because if I was a black guy, they would have shot them, right? My position is okay. This is these are two totally different cops and maybe they didn't choose him because they would have never shot anybody. Maybe he's right. He's cops never would have shot a black guy or a white car Asian guy or anybody but the point is this is how dangerous it is to be a cop. Right? And this is why non-league. There's two cops on one guy and they can't control this motherfucker. Yeah, and this is why non-lethal methods are the cops are reluctant to use them sometimes. Yeah, and this is all so it just shows you how fucking hard.


It is to be a cop you get this crazy dude, and you can't taste them. You can't pepper spray me still gets your gun and shoots and kills one of you fucking nuts. It isn't that so I mean it's and I think you can't really jump to oh, this is racism with no evidence of racism right in that case. There is no racism right? Well what they're saying as far as we know if this was a black guy they would Shaman I understand why they feel like that because there are all these videos are black guys getting shot by cops and it is horrible. But this situation is two totally different human beings. That's the problem. It's in a generalization. It's the problem is and stereotypes. The problem is in the fat with a the real problem.


Is that these fucking cops exist at all, that wood would shoot a guy that's black just because he's black. Yeah. Those guys are real. Yeah. Those cops are there are and there's so many cops out there that have PTSD so many cops out there that there's they just don't know what is going on. They'll just shoot is a lot of that. Yeah, and I mean I had I've had people writing You saying like I work with cops and they need better training honey. Now, they're cops themselves will say we need more training and to act like some of them aren't racist as it's delusional as acting like all of them are, you know, I think you have to take it on a case-by-case basis. Honestly the thing that Sam did you listen to Sam Harris does our lying things it that everyone should listen to that very good, you know, it's based very much in and what we know as far as facts because Yeah, like super reasonable.


Yeah, and it was that I sent it to like my dad who's super you know, my left my center-left people in my life and he was like that was very good. You know, I don't think he hears that perspective, right? Where's Sams Sams a brave man, Sam Harris Brave man, because he's already been attacked so many times for having these unconventional but very reasonable positions and yet he still puts them out there and he knows before he Some out there that is going to get some Flack and get some but he's the heat deleted his Twitter from his phone. He doesn't have Twitter on his phone. I have it on my phone doing things like that can have a big impact on talking shop today. He's deleted all social media from his phone.


He doesn't have any social media in his life anymore. Yeah. I really only use Twitter and I only have it on my desktop so that if I'm I can only check it when I'm like in front of a computer. I don't have it. Worst of you then you should be writing. Yeah, I mean that might that might be a problem too. And I just need to delete it completely. I'm gonna get a computer. Either that doesn't connect to the internet. I think, you know like from the 1982 know they have those like Snowden has one that has like a switch. Yeah, literally shut the water off. I might need that can't get tempted. Yes, like while you're working the Wi-Fi is off. I mean you can always go to Wi-Fi and through those. Yeah, that seems like a they have a square that too. I think they're gonna help not want a button like a click you could just unplug the Wi-Fi.


No. No, it's just too. Because this I mean you're a writer, you know as much as anybody the the the temptation to procrastinate. Yeah, it's so hard to avoid. I mean I lie. I would I actually want to know how many words I've written on Twitter and I've deleted I always kind of just delete I'll go have a mood around like I'm deleting everything and then I'll just delete every tweet and so I was thinking like God, it's really a shame how many books I've written on Twitter. Yeah, but also Twitter Great American novel doing is also giving you a very large following that's how I mean II knew you yeah store but I really got in your shit because of Twitter.


Yeah. No, I think you can tell pretty quickly about someone on Twitter. I think it's the best social media for seeing who someone is because everyone no one's afraid to be kind of their piece of shit self on Twitter. You know, it's really the most it's the most honest I think of social media as because it's primarily a battle of the wits No, it's not choosing gauge. It's not so much like Instagram, which I can't stand. I don't know how people I don't know how anyone doesn't screw are you on it? I'm on it, but I never use it. I hate it. I go Hannibal. I just every it's so fake. It's so curated. I know because all the people on Instagram showing me their lives.


They call me with all their problems. I'm like, I know it's going on in your life bitch. It's not like I'm like This it's so true. And so I think it's just as like phony to me and I go in there and like I can't and all the women are just how does anyone feel okay about them self on there. I spent five minutes on there as like I'm old. I'm ugly. I'm getting judged wrinkles. How do I get rid of jezz wrinkles? I gotta go Whitney. Yeah. So to get you an NAD drip. Yeah, this this filter thing that so why don't you posted about your Order that your daughter's filter and made you the pretty lady.


How weird is that? You know that was used in a class at Texas Tech that survived. Yeah, it is terrifying. Yeah, but that's what girls are dealing with they look at themselves in the mirror. And then they look at like like the Kourtney Khloe which one none of those people are real, but the which was the one where she had a totally different head. Oh, maybe they'll I don't know any of them the old one. Which one which one Chloe Chloe, okay. You know what? She looks like. Yeah. She looks one way and then the picture was like, okay, who's this? Yeah, and it wasn't her. I mean they're doing stuff. They're moving their frame around and changing. Yeah, but they're so big doing stuff in real life. But this one was so bad that she photoshopped one side of the chain on her neck off.


So she's wearing a change got like yeah, but she didn't realize it's very thin chain that she had accidentally Photoshop one side of the chain was gone was not in the image. Oh, wow, look at the the chain like half hour on the right hand side. The chain is missing. Oh, yeah that even her body. I mean, I guess maybe that is so great. I mean it's so damaging. There's so much pressure for young girls and hers. Well, she's gonna go outside. I'm not worried about her but I'm worried about her too. I don't know. I really worried about her as a human being she is stopped, but that's how you get gets here.


People off your case. Yeah attack other people. No not exactly. No I'm attacking you is problematic. It's terrible. I can't she's a person she's a human being you're dehumanizing a Kardashian. It's really bad. You know, it's not cool. I don't feel bad for them. They're rich. Wow, but that's the problem when you say things like that because they suffer from Italy. Well, we all suffer we do but it's easier when you're rich. Yeah. Agree on that. I think that could be the same picture. Well, how do they do the face smile in them? That doesn't make sense? I don't mean the exact same photo outside but like the same photo shoot.


Oh, wow, that's crazy. I don't know what they have a lot done to their bodies to I think someone could probably do that at a doctor's office could make her look like the I mean if I have enough money, maybe you think so get crazy. We'll see you when I'm money. I'll be like, hey, I'll come in and look completely different. Where's Bridget and who are you? All right - I'm Brigitte. I just got rich and now I have tons of work. Yeah, I've reconstructed my entire being we're one Renee Zellweger did yeah it ruins our life. What do you you can't we know what you look like? What was the who is the original one? Who did this Jennifer Grey? Yeah from to yeah.


She said it ruined her life. She was like known for her nose and then she got the nose job and that it kind of ruined her ability to get it worked. Yeah. Oh, wow. I think she said that I might be that makes sense that she stopped working. Yeah, and she was hot. Yeah, I mean, yeah, I mean, it's a nose that's not perfect is not make you unsexy just doesn't it comes from within hmm. Looks like you're crazy. She had a beautiful body. She had a great personality. She was pretty she just had a non-perfect knows it's funny. I guess what so do I shall be busy.


I was joking about this the other day like someone's asking me how I stay saying and covid and what I'm doing and like I focus on the only two things that matter in life being hot and Rich try to get hotter and Richard that's yeah. That's the run I get mad on Twitter. I do push-ups That's just you know, the temptation to alter your face like that is I guess if you've see what some of the success stories. Yeah. No, it's some of the other Kardashians that have done it and it worked out awesome. Yeah, there's a lot of pressure, you know, they're definitely I was not too into any of it. And then I started being on camera more with all these media hits and I was like, oh man, I had somebody just screencap for one of the interviews.


I did. I was like dude, you're the person doing this hate me. Why would they choose that? I look like I was eating sheet cake. For breakfast did they catch the leg with eyes helpful to the mouth open as like how many Chin's do I have I did after this the last time I was on your show. I just kept getting emails. Stop eating bread. That's you calling me texting me and emailing Rems friends are saying those eating bread. Yeah. This is the kind of pressure that Hollywood puts on you may just be funny. Yeah, but it's on just be fun. I mean fat shaming work. That's the problem. It's worked on me.


It worked on me. When I went on that carnivore diet. One of the reasons why I got up to like 205 pounds which for me is kind of fat. I was getting a belly. I was getting these love handles and we did this way in thing for sober October and people like look at your belly. I'm like fuck it is kind of sticking out and I did I got there for the that episode at the worst time because I eaten and I eat like a wolf. Yeah. I like there's no food. Coming forever. Like I'll eat like two steaks all you like a bowl of pasta. I got left accent. I love it out here. Yeah, I could eat barbecue for breakfast. Which places have you gone to what's the one where Matthew McConaughey this the so it's the one where Matthew McConaughey said his favorite famous line and Dazed and Confused.


It's it's good. They used time Bryce. No, it's Spitfire spit this so many idea. You can't be bad and stay open. Yes. So good as to play doh God for a place that I was like 2 million people living in it. They have like a hundred fifty thousand barbecue spot. There. He is right there. Yeah, you like that anymore. All right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that place is amazing. I went to the other one. That's really big the really famous one. That's kind of out Franklin's know. I haven't been there yet. I heard some amazing love barbecue. No, it's not that difficult.


Yeah, it's like an hour. It's just naming barbecue places. Yeah, I found out through Adam Curry that the actually was Germans. Come came here and they had like a smoked meat tradition Germany and that and they brought that and it became Texas barbecue. Have you been down to Green Green? Yeah Green Texas. It's not far but there's like an old it's a dance hall kind of common. We went the other night. It was awesome. There's just a guy I have a videos. I we were you. And dance because everybody's has the kind of social distance in there and he was just that sitting on stage playing the guitar and I don't know it was just that it's a tiny little town but I think it's there is a German founded Town.


Yeah. It's interesting. They're jerks Berg is very German and that's a place that's like got a lot of like craft places and Wineries and yeah, there's tons of History here. I was I was in Georgetown and there was a protest in front. Out of the city hall because of there's a Confederate statue is a small probe knows how many people it was mostly white people. And do you think they got there because of a Russian troll account? I don't know the guy with I spoke to like one of the Confederate like dudes after orders. Well, he's a descendant of these Fighters and he was trying to explain that.


They just don't want them to desecrate the he's like, we wouldn't go down too. In and death desecrate their soldiers and they were Union soldiers and we just think you know desecrate soldier that was like his whole argument for it and he's like of and of the lineage and so I was just chatting with him and and he was saying I'm a descendant of Mile and you know, the way I feels like leave now all alone and he was like, you know, you just don't come in like desecrate the statues and whatnot. But he he said they came every Tuesday and they'll Left it dark and it seemed like there were reasonable conversation. It seemed pretty you know reasonable.


It wasn't like screaming on one side and another it was like pretty chill. It is a good question. Right? Like if there's something that's openly racist and represents. One of the worst aspects of our country's history. Like what how do you treat it? Do you just leave a statue up or should we have like, maybe we should have like a graveyard for confederate statues and you could you could go and this one was actually in Huntsville, Alabama. As in front of the courthouse until last year and that crazy like a tour. I like instead of taking them down and smashing them wouldn't it be interesting if there was a place you can go we could see all of them, but then people would go there like we need to put these back.


What about they belong? Well II feel kind of like, yeah, we don't need them, you know some guy but the problem is there's a process that we usually go through to take them down. So I would generally are On the side of going through the process. But yeah, but the process doesn't work sometimes. Yeah, exactly and sometimes people just feel like they just want to pull them down. I suspect this is another thing that's going on right now. This is the perfect storm the convergence of all these different things that are happening at the same time and one of them being the covid lockdown. Yeah, social media the covid lockdown the polarization of our country with Trump and then you know, this this weird thing where everybody has to pretend that Biden isn't dying.


Like this is all happening together at the same time. Like everyone has to pretend he's gonna do a great job on the boat from we just need to get Trump out of office like oh my God like yeah, can we freeze this and freezes and rethink this do you guys have anybody else on Deck not knowing I mean, I guess Harris is on there and timbaland's I guess he's one of us. I seriously love the Tweet whoever it was was like, oh found the undercover cop like anyone who sees anyone wearing these in a club. This brand-new is the undercover cop which is Charlemagne party Charlemagne on Instagram was like, you know, because it was here that she's bringing back Timberlands and he was like, what the fuck are you talking about? Like, he's a he's in New York.


Like do the New York. I've been wearing Timberlands forever. They've been wearing them since the 80s whenever they started wearing. They never stopped wearing. Like this the she's bring it back Timberlands. Yeah, it's like some guy saying I'll bring it back chucks. You know, I'm just bringing back Converse All-Stars. Fuck you. You are never went away man. You can't bring back something that never went away and timbaland's in New York. Especially never went away. Yeah, you're not allowed to go back to bite and you're not allowed to say that your problematic but I've been getting cancelled for that for I said I said in that column I said something like he may or may not be Going into dementia. I mentioned about why I'm not voting and then someone from The New York Times said that is a widely debunked conspiracy theory that he's slipping into dementia.


And I said, okay I said may or may not and can you post like cite your source for where this has been debunked so that my like people reading this thread can see it and this New York Times researcher writer says well, I've seen him speaking and that's just what I gather from like You see something that attorney Bond gang I situation. That's not you. Okay, so you see something and have a different opinion and other people have a different opinion. That's not widely. Like oh, well, I've seen it and that's it. Could you imagine let's let's pretend the Kamala Harris was the Democratic nominee and Biden was a republican. Could you imagine how Savage Oh, yeah, they would be attacking his mental incompetence.


Yeah. No. No, that's actually Ali A really interesting. Well this time experiment bizarre bias comes into play and this is where everybody's getting gas-lit because they're pretending that everything's okay because all they want to do is get Trump out of office but in doing that you're exposing this very bizarre tendency that people have to comply and to go along with these lines of thinking and behaving and talking and I can't get into that man because that's cult shit. Yeah that's religious shit. And that's where these things come from. From become from everybody not saying what they really feel because there's an agreement that's been made. Yeah, but you're gonna be on the right team, aren't you you're going to do the right thing.


You're going to do the right thing on. Yeah, I will burn your fucking house down some guy. We have to stop these fascists or we'll burn your house down some good offered me an interview with someone who I probably could get an interview with him anyway, and he said if you vote for Biden I will get you this guy as an interview. Come on. We have to save the country what those those real message I got I'm like, hey, bro, like so I don't he's laughing. That's so yeah, that's just I understand where you're going with it's like so crazy. Yes fucking insane. It's it come on. We have to save the country. Are you sure? What? What about what about it? Do you want to save the country? What what what part is going to save? What is it? What's going to happen when I was on I didn't want to Brett's Unity campfires.


And what did yeah, and you know, I was asking I was like everyone is saying that the other side is the existential threat and then brought was kind of like well, we need to come together because this that is the existential threat but everyone but isn't that I'm like why is everyone on flight 93, you know, like everyone's scared of course, but it's also I guess maybe I have optimistic faith in America like I don't really see how Trump or Biden like, how can May I don't know I don't know. I hope that it was either one of them can't destroy America and for years because that means America's already fucked.


Yeah. Well what kind of fucked I don't like saying. I know my my 16 year old nephew and all his friends. Listen, and I don't want to give these children. No hope for the future they have hope for the future but we're fuck do they? Yeah, we do. Yeah. Yeah, that wasn't we're not in the Dark Ages know the Mongols aren't coming over the hills with horses and Flaming arrows that shit. I always say we're like people are like there's a civil war. I'm like, we're just marriage too fat for civil war. Who's who's fighting? What does that even look like there will be more armed conflict that will be that's that's going to happen because when you have things like the Kenosha guy who shows up, you know with an AR and Dieter take his gun.


Yeah, they'll shoot at LARPing. All this stuff is crazy all of its crazy like that more of that stuff is going to happen. If you have more of these conflicts and their cattle. Well, the guy in Seattle is not Kid. Wow, was it Seattle or Portland were shot that Portland right Portland? It's not a trump supporter. Yeah, it was Portland. That guy was not a kid. Yes, the fucking sociopath. Yeah who found a team that he could get with ya. Did you see the interview with him with Vice before they cast them? Yeah before the go before the cops. Did you ever see documentary now that show where they made fun of ice. They parodied nice it that interview at that guy reminded me exactly.


The documentary Now parody of Vice. It was like this can't be real. Well, the interviewed a guy after he killed a guy in the street with a gun and then was justifying it with like here's my face. Yeah. I am. I definitely did it like admitting that he did it in the way he did it was in this weird cult e what like what he was saying? I wasn't going to let him kill one of my friends of color. That's what he said like, but it was it was so clear that This is a person who's like saying the things that he thinks you're supposed to say to signal that you're on this team. I think they believe that though. Oh, yeah. I mean look if you believe Trump is literally Hitler.


All of that behavior makes sense. Yeah, because what lengths would you go to stop Hitler but it's the same thing and not calling out Joe Biden. Yeah, right not saying the Joe Biden is is having mental issues is the same thing because it's all your what you're doing is you are you're saying things that don't necessarily have to make sense, but they align you with a group they align you with your compliant your fitting into the words that need to be said that that it's a cult. Yeah. It's cut in on both sides. Right wing and left wing the Trump devotion sense. Oh my God. It's crazy cunt Arrangement, which is real and there's Trump devotion syndrome, which is the mag aside and it is it's real.


Oh, I we made fun of them on dumpster fire just because he said something like completely retarded and deserves to be my all politicians deserve to be mocked what happened America we used to make fun of all of our politicians. And so I think that in that same episode I had made fun of like Ben and the whole car. DB thing where he went viral, where's pussy which was hilarious. By the way, if you listen to the gynecological condition, if you listen to the whole ten minutes is a pretty good bet. Oh, yeah, it's pretty funny. And so he went Bonnie. Oh, yeah. He's really smart funny dude is funny. So he retweeted and my cousin calls me. She's like we are our comments on YouTube are like insane people defending Trump.


They couldn't get past two minutes of us. May the next segment. We make fun of by. And then proceeded to make fun of Nancy Pelosi and everything else, but they could not get past two minutes of us making fun of dear leader. Yeah. Well, there's there's a there's an issue. I mean it works on both ways. There's Trump tweeted a thing recently with me and Matt Taibbi talking about Biden where I said that Biden the flashlight, that's a great job, but I'm comedian and I was making a joke, but on the same podcast we talk about Trump being a sociopath we talked we talked about all his life. He just fucking lies like Like it was not a trump supporting pocket. Yeah, but Trump's like good enough never post it Maga and everyone's like yeah, this is where we live in this world with no Nuance.


Yes, it's very cold tea the but I wonder how many of those Trump supporters that you get on Twitter or Bots because a lot of them a lot of them are, you know, the devotion is real devotion is real. I mean, I know people in real life who are borderline queuing on and There they cried watching, you know, the RNC sure they're there the devotion and I understand look I get it too because he rose out of the domination of the mainstream media the culture the domination of Academia Hollywood all of it. And he was like a fuck you vote by many people and they feel like he is defending them in the thing.


I hear from them over and over again is he will stand up he'll stand against this. This tide of insanity coming from left. He'll stand up for us. And for smart people are voting for him. Yeah, that's a silent vote right now. Yeah, that's a side that's going to be just like 2016. This is propaganda. Just what I thought everybody felt the way I feel how this is another thing. I keep hearing which is hilarious people who told me that he could never win in 2016 and then it was impossible are telling me again. It's impossible. He can't win. I'm like You're telling me the thing that already happened that you thought was impossible is impossible. What kind of logic is this?


It doesn't even they're so crazy. That's and when you know, the thing about Russian meddling people talk about Russian meddling. I love it. So here's the real thing about Russian meddling. The real thing is these trolls like they do affect people. Yeah, they do. It really does work. Like if you get enough of these troll accounts that they literally higher to post pro-trump things and Can things and memes all these things like I it catches people up in the wave and they want to be a part of that group of people that's piling on against Biden. Yeah and piling on for Trump and a lot of it. Like there was one what there was a protest is I think almost an Austin I forget where it was but it was a protest against white rage.


This is a protest and this dude trace the IP address back to Russia. It's like, this is Chris. But they're organizing. Oh, yeah protest. I know. I know Renee to resta. She did this whole study of it and it was it's really fascinating is because she found hundreds of thousands of these posts. Oh, yeah, there were all from this internet research agency in Russia. I want their funny so I know I love it when something is trending on Twitter and someone will be like, it's 9 a.m. In Russia, you know the bots of like weird something random. You're like, why is this trending and it's something anti biting her sewing descent and it's Always spelled wrong. And yes, it's just like go Rush has logged in for their workday to it to this is what's fucked up about it.


It's like we're talking about meddling in our elections. But like you know what that's like that's like someone who's a fucking thief. Yeah saying someone's been stealing from me. Like what the stealing some shit you stole? Yeah, but what are you talking about? Yeah do that with other countries. Yeah, if we're upset that China is fucking with us. You don't think we fuck with China come on. It's like that American. Emma see ya kind of mentality where it's like how dare these countries who have historically meddled in their elections meddle in our elections. Don't you understand? This is outrageous, please the world. Yeah. Now it's been it's a wild, you know, I had a funny experience kind of observing how people will engage with these Bots and my nephew's probably too young to be on Twitter has kind of recently got on.


He's like they call me D. He's like look, I had a tweet that went pretty big and it was like him making some comments about they're coming after Liz. Oh and he made this kind of people coming after Liz. Oh not for some reason and he made some comment about it. That was smart, but it wasn't necessarily like, you know a to be logic because he's like 12 and people adults were commenting and yelling at him and I'm like, oh this is why I'm never going to argue with someone. I don't know on Twitter again because they might be 12. It might be 12 year old. Very likely either 12 or what is this report? Arizona teens paid to file social media posts for campaigns.


Whoa. Yeah, Washington Post report of yesterday. Apparently, they're being paid and then when asked this is the quote from The Good the CEO of the company real kids operating the real social media profiles and promoting mainstream American values. Well, Jake hop and president and CEO of rally Forge said Emailed statement Wednesday that the posts were nothing more than in his quote real kids operating real social media profiles and promoting mainstream American values. He said what these young Arizona activists are doing is honest and sincere political activism in the 21st century in the age of covid-19 whose firm was linked by the post to the Turning Point project.


So it's turning point. Yeah. It did not find portions. Neither Turning Point action nor the Affiliated Turning Point USA responded for Request turning point is conservative youth Outreach organization. Its founder Charlie Kirk was a featured speaker the Republican National Convention. Yeah. So like a sweatshop. Yeah Galactus kids. Imagine. There's a lot of money in it. So you got like real writers start like people like you start wondering like, oh I could so some serious to sense. Everybody on both sides should be happy. I'm not on either. One of these fucking sides and you to Thanking us that we're not picking a fucking side and I will bury the other side.


No, right. I thought of that before I thought of like starting an anonymous account and just saying all the things that I really feel and just going to war with people on Twitter. I've never done it I won't do it. I really won't do it because I feel like the problem with that being deceptive like here's what I'm 100% committed to if I say Something it's because I mean it yeah, I have to do that. Yeah, it's got me here and when they be wrong, I'll write up the time. I'm wrong Allah all the time, but I'll tell you I was wrong. Yeah, but you can trust that the words that come out of my mouth or what I really think well, I think and I could be wrong but I think we share a somewhat desire to explore honesty honesty.


You know, honestly what I'm feeling. Yeah, and sometimes I have to push back against myself. Sometimes I'll say things. So that I can get pushed back and here see the blind spots. I'm not going to know what my own blind spots are unless I put my opinion out there and hear back from people not all of it is great. Some of its really reasonable criticism that I yeah, I can take in from people I respect, you know, not not even people who maybe I am completely if if someone is not even my friend, but they critique something in a respectful way. I'll hear that you know, I don't I feel like it's if necessary to just I try really hard to be honest.


I can't it's not lucrative for me. No, I think you know money and Nuance kids. This is true. No, I I mean ultimately yeah. Yeah, ultimately there is there's there's a future in that ultimately but we're this is one of the reasons why I'm so steadfast today. It's because we're in the most polarized the most ideologically based time ever in terms. Like you have a side you stick with it you battle against the other side and I see this from smart people and it drives me crazy. Yeah, it drives me crazy because I'm like, I know you're smart because I know you're educated. I know, you know a lot of facts but you are so fucking stupid about human nature.


Yeah to behave like this because you're denying the very thing that literally has made us racist the very thing that's made us go to war tribalism. Yeah. This is what it is all of it stems from people who look like me. Me or people who think like me or people from the patch of dirt that I'm from. Those are on my team. Yeah, we gotta stick together and we go to all agree, but that that's nonsense that's nonsense. And we know it's nonsense. We know that in 2020 that we don't have to think like that. It's not smart. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think that our Founders really understood human nature and they had this Insight which I still don't know how they managed to have.


It's a miracle maze I mean Joan Goldberg wrote this amazing book suicide of the West and he talks about all of this essentially how the Enlightenment and we just stumbled on this miracle and in the end. He has the appendix. I'm like if anyone in America should read anything. It should just be the appendix of his book, which is all the stats of how much Humanity has been lifted out of the dirt, you know, and we've lifted up even in developing world like everybody's doing yeah, there's problems obviously, but everybody overall It's never been more convenient and easier for humans to just exist. And I sometimes feel like is this just humans because they're not fighting and trying to like survive their self-destructing and having to create that reality for themself is life.


Just too easy. There's a lot of that there's a lot of the existential risk the real risk of humanity up until now has been War murdered. Yeah Defcon. So hard and that was the what people concentrated on but now because of mean who is discussing this with me the other day. Was it Douglas Murray? Maybe or was it I don't forget who it was how many? Yeah anyway so many guess. Yeah, but this is this is part of the problem with social media is like the problems that you have today are big to you because you do not have big problem right when you have big problems if you have someone in your family that you love.


Yeah, that's that's dying or sick someone calling you a fuckhead on Twitter doesn't mean anything to you. Yeah, but when you don't have that and then you like hey, fuck you, you know again you that that Twitter comment is the thing that gets Yeah, and that gets you out of bed and you check the comments and see what else did they say? Oh, and I said this let's see. I got them now. Yeah, you know Nest this is your conflict. This is you with a catapult. It's the finding laughing now, it's crazy because it's like I know women on the east side and New York who are online all day battling and they're like, I'm so tired. This is so exhausting. I am in so much distress. I mean, it's mental illness. It's in there and I'm like you're doing this to yourself.


You are all doing. This to yourself. It's not a lot of the conflict and I was saying this on Twitter the other day. I'm like, I'll be worried about America when no one can tweet like you're all tweeting and your online bitching about something or other when you have like you said when you have somebody for instance a cancer diagnosis someone in my life recently with thought they were diagnosed with cancer. They weren't for that 24 hours you realize that is your life now. Well, that's how I felt at the beginning of covid the beginning of a lockdown. I really thought it was going to be like September 11. Like when September 11 came around everybody joined up we all got together because we all realize like a all this petty bullshit. Yeah important what's really important is we got a fucking band together because we're gonna run out of toilet paper and food because there's a disease coming it's going to kill everybody and then when that didn't happen, it's like it ramped up the other way.


Everybody just got crazier. Hey, it just goes to show you how hilarious it is. The people were sucking about toilet paper. You're like green had a great point though. Tom Green's point was when you go to the supermarket. Paper is light item, but it takes up a lot of space. Yeah, and you only have so much shelf space and he goes it's just people seeing other people stockpiling when they take it and then it's missing dude. I don't have one but I know like that's not the first thing I would think of that I've also worked in farms and like shit in the woods. So yeah, so you can you know, that's not my first thought and the apocalypse like that's what I need to stockpile. What's it like water?


Yeah exactly. It shows you how disconnected we are. With realtor like oh what am I gonna do? I'm not going to be able to wipe my ass from all this food that I'm binge eating Wildlife down and that's like saying like that's not a real crisis guys and drinking constantly. Everybody's drinking without like some. Oh, yeah a nose like 20% more a while. The Bars were closed alcohol consumption Rose like 20% I am on a I had to it was hard for me because I'm sober and I'm on threads with my very Irish Catholic Family and for the first couple weeks or is just pictures of their there boo stockpile. Which I 100% would have done if I was back in my drinking days before even water it would have been it would have been booze.


Yeah, I mean my family I always tell this Joker like it's something that's just funny in our family. It was like police. It was a police Vickers Liquors and then fire on the emergency contact that's real. My grandmother had that in our growing up more likely to be real fires. Don't really start until after we drink. Oh my God, so funny. Yeah, it was it was a I think it's just interesting to see when I remember when I first started I was I was kind of eerie like no one was out in La those it was rainy and those first days I went down to the beach. There was no one on the beach.


There's no one even driving and I walked by this guy. He was kicked back in a sofa. He had his television on you had a beer he was on his phone just with a nice little Throne. I was like, this is Right. Yeah. I really like I've never seen a more perfect picture of what the modern apocalypse looks like. It's not fighting for I just remember remember he tree know when it got really bad down there and people were fighting for food and it got it got Savage really really quickly in those and I think it was in like the Superdome. Hmm. Yeah. Have you ever read the book blindness? No, I couldn't read fiction for a two years after I read that book and it's all about pandemic of blindness its people and they all get put in quarantine.


They get quarantine together the people who are getting this blindness and then the wife of the guy who gets he is like stricken with blindness. She fakes it so she can be with her husband and she's witnessed to all the shit that goes down once all these people are out of society and in this quarantine and it's like rapes and murders and steal and just how Quickly, it kind of the veneer of society deteriorates wrote it. Oh God, he won a Pulitzer for it. I'm gonna blank on it. Thank you. He's a great writer. It's amazing. Yeah, so I think that were you know, it's pretty under the circumstances.


The other thing that I've been kind of surprised about is like you were saying there's going to be more armed conflict. I was like, I'm pretty amazed at how restraining people My name is like 300 million guns maybe probably 400 million dollars for the people. Yeah guns with people. Yeah, and just a few shooting pretty restraint. Yeah, pretty restrain good Josh America, especially considering the videos of cop shooting black people, especially when you think about how crazy could have gotten there's been some horrific incidents. Yeah. This is a really bad one. I think it was in Baltimore this white guy walking on the street. And for no reason this black kid runs up a Item and hit him in the head with a brick.


Yeah guy faceplants and the people that are filming it or in a car and they're laughing. Yeah. Well The Brick hits the guy and the guy faceplants on the concrete how much violence but for no reason, right? Yeah. It's crazy. But so little of that comparatively. Yeah cool what it could be. Yeah, you know, there's a lot of people that thought a real race war was going to happen in this country, but I think most people the vast majority of people are not Racist the vast majority the vast majority of cops, I think are not racist. I think the vast majority of people are not violent or evil the vast majority. That's why you can just go places. Yeah. That's why it's not a fucking Shooting Gallery everywhere you go.


Yeah, the vast majority of people are not violent or evil, you know, it's just we have human beings living together in a very imperfect scenario. Yeah, you don't we we were talking about this the other day, you know hear about the plains of the land. You just you there are so many people doing so many good things all the time don't hear about them. And so you're only hearing even in police shootings. It's like we focus in a lot of this I blame on the media is like it would be like only focusing on planes that crash was fun. Even the media anymore. A lot of these things are just online videos that go viral. Yeah, but I think that so much of the the division and that like picking Narratives, there are their driving narratives and I and people are obviously kind of partaking in this but I still think that it's we when I first like you said about the early days of pandemic, I thought the same thing because you would go out and there was you have this kind of like you'd like you have your mask on or whatever you walk and people were out walking because they can go to the gym or anything and there would be that you kind of look at each other with that solidarity.


There's that feeling of like Yeah, we're in this. Yeah, and it was only two weeks later before people are crossing the street angrily. I got Mass Shame by a guy we were walking and I had my bandana just around my neck, and he was very far away and he was like no mask no mask screaming at us and I'm right red. You're a bad person. You don't have a mask on but he's I'm like, dude, you're gonna have a heart attack before covid ever kills you just yelling at people who don't have mass and and he's not going to I wouldn't have to Spit in his mouth for him to get covid from me. He's not gonna get it from me from a block and a half away. Just yelling. And this is where I think people are driving themselves insane.


Well, the unhinged I've never had a better time this is this is their time because they have so much company, you know, if you're an unhinged person like you're on team unhinged like like oh look at all the people on my side where you don't have that tweet. That was like we have a mental health problem. That's a we have a gun pressed something about guns and mental health. Yeah. Well problem disguises. Problem and a tyranny problem described as a security problem. Yeah, that's a great tweet. I think about that all the time because man is that played out? Yeah, because now we're just seeing the mental health and the Tyranny. Yeah. Well, we would generally have a gigantic mental health problems country. Look I am a person who I've done a lot of things.


I've a family I'm happy. I have good friends. I'm successful and I have mental health problems. Yeah of mental health problems. Yeah, and my mental health problems are very, D Minor I just want to be real clear. They're very minor but I get weirded out sometimes we all do we all we all get in Funk. Sometimes we all have issues. We all have issues. Yeah when something challenges us and we don't have character and we don't have a history of overcoming issues and we don't have tools in terms of like whether it's exercise or meditation or yoga or whatever you do to alleviate tension, and then you have the fucking gasoline, which is social media. Yeah, and you throwing gasoline on Fire instead of figuring out a way to put out the coals.


You're just going to have Madness and there's so many people that are unhand right now and hand they've been alone and isolated and it just shows how much you need that social interaction because people I feel like are losing their manners, you know, I've heard from many people and my sister texted me. She said I just saw a real life Facebook fight at dinner and it was like and someone else texted me and he said I just saw real-life Twitter interaction in the grocery store. So this behavior that generally is relegated to the way we are when we are Anonymous or not anonymous online with each other that you would never necessarily be if you were face-to-face because everybody's been online.


It's like they're starting to behave that way in real life. That's not good. Well, that's what everybody's afraid of was afraid of when it comes to like video games. Yeah, people are afraid that like violent video games were forcing people or we're going to cause people to be violent in real life. I don't think that's real. I think they've done studies of that's not real Patterson ever proven that to I think there's exactly violence has gone down. Yes the opposite but I think that there's something about the way human beings are just interacting with other human beings those video games. You're not shooting a real person you're shooting of an avatar. You know, you shoot a thing and it's fun. The thing about interaction with people's You're really hurting someone's feelings.


Yeah, and then you get used to doing that and then you don't you're not around people a lot. Yeah and most of Interactions of just this way and then when you are around people you behave in the same way that you would if people were in front of you. Yeah, I mean, I think about how much like how many mental health tools? I need I don't I'm not I am like you I mental health problems. I've had anxiety in my past. I had debilitating hypochondria that I overcame a jewelry coming man. I should really write a book about I should write kill your hypochondria before it kills you because it was developed dating. Volatile it was debilitating and it was iced people. Don't get past that my therapist was like you how did you do this?


But it was basically I took okay, so it was kind of a three-pronged attack because I'm like, I can't live like this because hypochondria truly makes you feel insane and you know, you can objectively know I'm crazy but your mind gets stuck. It's like OCD and so it's it's kind of based in OCD because you get Cantaloupe like I would just get stuck in a loop. For instance. Like there's something wrong with my lip. There's something wrong with my lip. There's something wrong with my lip. There's something rotten. I don't know every just get stuck in that Loop or I have throat cancer. I've sort of cancer. I've you know, I would just feel like stuck in this crazy loop it since it's insane. Did it come slowly or did it got worse?


You know? No, I think I come from like a long line of hypochondriac. So now because that my mom used to have you know the deal Remember those books before the internet where it was like if you have this it was like a Choose Your Own Adventure, but it was like a few have this symptom before the internet there. Are these books. Are he be like a few of these some this symptom go to page 233 and if you have this and I remember my mom would use those quite a lot. So I think she has some of it. My dad is just a big worrywart. So I have that kind of neurotic energy, I believe but I think to I was smoking a lot of weed and I mostly got it when I was hungover.


Like that's when it would be the worst as I would be hungover. So anyway, I had this realizing what you did to your body. I think I just had I had to attack it from from three different places. So the first is the actual I was like, all right. I'm going to rewire my fucking brain and and I set myself out to do this and I put it rubber band on and I did that stupid thing, but it totally worked where if I was like there's something wrong with my lap and I'd snap my rubber. Rubber band and I'd be like, I'm healthy. I am I would just replace it with I am healthy and if I should come up with that idea, I read somewhere that it's a good way to help with like repetitive thoughts or to just help yourself it.


I mean I was training my dog at the same time to and I was like, yeah, this is kind of like dog training. I just have to interrupt that, you know, like back that firing and there's a whole idea of what fires together why it's not even idea. It's like what fires together wires together. So every time The other thing I had to do was explain what fires together wires together. So it's this concept of whatever you're kind of thinking and acting on it just creates like a pathway a neural pathway in your brain that gets stronger and stronger if they're if it's like the like for instance if I so this is why I part 2 was replacing the thought but I also couldn't act on it so I couldn't go look in the mirror.


I couldn't go Google anything if I thought I had. Cancer I had to cut myself off from acting on because a lot of people have hypochondria. They'll obsessively Google they'll go get tested for everything. They'll spend thousands of dollars getting test. Luckily. I was not on head didn't have insurance. I was too poor to really like lean fully into my hypochondria that way and I just had to stop myself from the action because that you know any time you have a thought in you act on it reinforces that connection that like mind-body connection. It would reinforce that pattern of worrying and then I had to start observing. I kept this is very I guess to it's very like CBT so cognitive behavioral therapy.


I didn't know this is kind of what I was doing, but I would keep now they have very it's like you keep a record. I thought what they call a thought log and I would just document when I had the thought what brought it up like what triggered that that because there's always kind of a trigger and then what action I took and what and I could take to replace it. And so I sometimes just not acting on it at all. And then I started working with therapist on all the things that were under pinning those the the triggering thought. So one was like I couldn't hold Joy. I just any time I felt like I was excited about doing anything. I was going to Hawaii that was when I was like perseverating on my lips and I couldn't it was like I could not enjoy anything without my brain telling me that everything was going to shit.


I was going to die. So I had to look at that. Where does that come from feelings of worthlessness up bringing whatever. Yeah, then the other one was shame around sexuality. Like there was just some a lot of Shame around like I was pretty promiscuous when I was drinking a lot and I didn't I wasn't always proud of the men I woke up with and it happens to the party girls. And you know, I was an intern Arizona International sluts and There were some there some like Gil. I'm Catholic to raised Catholic. So that shit got squirted in before I had a chance in hell and so there's lots of Shame around that that I had to really look at and deal with and and yeah, so I just started looking at all this stuff and I like it took me it was work.


It was freaking work and now I'm like completely free of it. I don't yeah, it's amazing you did that. Congratulations. I mean, I I definitely I feel like I can live and breathe and I can just Present meditation was big and then I think a lot of people forget that you know, drinking and substances are not a coping mechanism. They can be if you if you are not using them addictively but for many people like drinking is they'll be like, I have a coping to its drinking like that's that of coping toe exacerbates it well. Yeah like it or not. So I had to quit that and I was joking just like how many fucking things I need to do to start my day. So I'm like I wake up I meditate I have to like Like, you know, I have to work out.


I'm a crazy person. I've got a sweat. There's I just know what I have to do. Yeah, and people it's important. I think instead of and people ask me all the time how I deal with the online hate and all that Mike. I just go work out. That's my answer to everything. Yeah, that's an answer go work out because he requires effort and it requires it like as much as it's difficult when you're sitting down in front of a computer to overcome procrastination right multiply that times 10 and Get into the gym because the physical discomfort of tree like a you like your mind while your brain will mind. Fuck you. Yeah, that's why I have these this I have like mugs and t-shirts that say conquer your inner bitch.


I love that this what it is. There's a thing it's in me. I was talking to David Goggins one of the most Savage people that's on the planet today and he and I had a long hilarious conversation on the phone yesterday about it. And I said one of the things that are really appreciate about you. You as you talk about your struggles, like there's a video that I put up on my Instagram the other day. I just wrote stay hard and it's his video and it's him talking about this struggle that he has David Goggins one of the hardest men alive. He has his struggle sometimes when he gets up. He just starts feeling sorry for him. Yeah, he starts feeling like it just like fuck I'm tired and I want to do this. Yeah, and then he actually says he said those thoughts into a tape recorder or you know phone or whatever the fuck it is and then listen to it play back and he's like I sound like a straight bitch.


Yeah, that's hilarious wise did yeah, and then he got fired up and went out and did it but what I said to him is what's so important about him and what why he's so important to people's because he shows you the weakness. Yeah shows you that he has these thoughts himself, but he just always wins. Yeah, he overcomes those but he knows that those demons are there they're there for everybody but he's just got a long history of overcoming those demons and so he knows that he just has to go to work. It's the war. Warrior ethos, yeah. No, it's something I've really always tried to develop and myself and I respect and other people and I think that you don't have to be a like literal Warrior to develop that ethos and it's something that used to be so respected and Sparta and there were just so many there's that was something that was revered and I feel like in our society now because victimhood has become currency like no warrior in the fucking world would ever want to be considered a They will die on their own sword.


Yeah, and it's important that I think people like David and you and I just said to really Embrace that spirit and try and promote it because ultimately it feels better to work against your worst instincts. It does it just it might be harder but it feels at the end it feels so good. You you don't have to do a lot. This is the other thing that I love about there's this great book tiny habits, and it's all about bundling habits and how you you don't have to start every day and say I'm going to start working out every day and hour. No, you're probably going to fail just start doing 10 minutes and then you might do more. Yeah and then bundle it with one minute of meditation and just start little increments and just inconsistent, you know, that's great advice because it really is about building healthy habits, not so much.


It's it's just my friend said to me, it's more more. Habits less goals because we're so goal-oriented and goals are good to work towards but you're not going to get there without healthy consistent habits and people are just discipline is fucking hard. It is fucking hard. It's hard to be disciplined. It is hard and the victim mentality one of the reasons why we rejected so heavily is because it's completely contrary to Comedy. Yeah, but if everyone is a victim and you can't like have any victims ever well, then you can have any jokes. No because you're Make fun of things that are Preposterous and as soon as you can't make fun of things that are Preposterous like like I was talking we were talking before about this Vise thing that was written about transphobic episodes of this podcast.


And one of the things that they wrote was that I incorrectly described how Caitlyn Jenner transition or why Caitlyn Jenner transition. I'm like Oh, you mean Kris Jenner isn't really a demon that hovers over is bad and Whispers in his ear. Again converted him to a woman like what the fuck are you talking about? It's this this kind of nonsense is like inviting and I know Caitlyn Jenner got mad at me. I was only just recounting an old joke from 2016. Yeah, I got no hate for that person. No. No, I'm sorry. If I said the wrong name, I don't have any no hate we are making big deals out of things that aren't big deals and we're making we're turning jokes into literal statements that are that is hate.


Speech. Yeah, that shit is not Nonsense and you know, it's nonsense. Yeah, and you know, it's not so we had to I mean we were having there is we're driving yesterday and there's a Planned Parenthood above a Mexican place that we drove by and I was like imagine you're like going in and they're like, yeah killing babies and it's like I just wanted to get a margarita, you know, it's just and we were making all these jokes and I was like God it feels so good to just be able to like joke freely because I feel like the the world has become. A floor of eggshells and everyone's like walking on eggshells. I was having can I say this? Can I say this because everyone's many people are dealing with mental illness and that's what it's like when you're dealing with mentally ill people are constantly walking on eggshells, but it's I always say two comedians on my don't die on your don't die on the content of the joke died on the right to be hyperbolic.


Yes, because that's what they're coming after exactly. They'll come after the Mi. Don't fight about the content of Of the joke just fight for your right to be a hyperbolic comedian because that's if we have that we have nothing we have to be ridiculous were fucking clowns will look at Joey Diaz. Yeah, he's the best example and in my opinion the funniest guy I've ever seen everything is everything he says is so over the top but that's part of why you laugh. Yeah, you know, he's not being honest. He's making you laugh. He's doing comedy and he's doing it by grossly. Exaggerating something so crazy. Yeah, that's why I get mad. When comedians are like you who are shitting on other comedians rice the other comedians going after other comedians for their jokes and like what the fuck is happening here as well.


They're always bad. Here's the thing. That's this is the fact the comedians that go after comedians for jokes. They're always mediocre. Yeah, there's this is and I don't know. I'm not trying to be mean no and I'm not always as a generalizations the to of the comic it's not always some of them are good Comics to do it. It erroneously but the thing that they're doing they're doing because there's a feeling inside you that always feels bad that you don't reach the high marks. There's like a thing where you don't quite and then you see someone step out of line. I see someone take it maybe misstep. Maybe the maybe they fuck up. Maybe they make a joke and it doesn't work and you want to attack them. Yeah and wanted to but Patrice O'Neal said it best and he said when someone tells a joke that kills or someone says a joke that People and doesn't work it all comes in the same place.


Yeah, and that place is you're trying to be funny. Yeah, that's what you try to do not trying to be mean, you know, and I remember particularly the early days of my stand-up comedy. I when I was terrible, I would just say anything to you know, laughs anything and I didn't have to believe it at all. Yeah, I literally didn't have to mean it. Yeah, if I knew that it would work and I treat it. I treated comedy jokes like hammers. Yeah. There's like a hammer. I'm Looking for a nail it does that word? Does that work? I would lost in the woods. I was had a blindfold and I was feeling for trees. Yeah, everybody though. That's what I did. Yeah, and then after a while I realized okay. Well some of these I have to think they're funny and then then it works better.


And then I just had to I had to figure out who I was but I got into comedy with very little real social life when I was 21 when I got into comedy. I'd only been fighting like I didn't have a normal childhood like my Out from 15 to 21 was all kicking people in the face and getting kicked. Like that was my whole life. So my whole sense of like what the world was was all fucked up. So I had to develop opinions on things. I had zero opinions on politics or weddings or and so all I talked about for like the first year of Comedy was sex. Yeah. That was my whole life common. That's all I had that that's pretty common, especially when you're 21, you know, what other life experience do you have?


Have and by the way, thank God. That's what you did because do you ever wonder where you would be if you were that age now? Oh my God, you'd be out in the streets. I was ever real problem. You've had antifa. I don't know what I would do. But but the point is like when I would tell a joke outside of sex, I really didn't know what was funny. Yeah. I didn't I knew it was for like certain things were funny with sex and that so I had those jokes, but if I tell a joke about Thing else I was just swinging at the wind. I love the process of finding what's funny though, even though it's uncomfortable and awkward I was doing I was trying to get this bit where I was talking about how my dad sent me down an awkward conversation about my freezing my eggs and I was like two old.


I was like 37. I was like Dad isn't this like asking me if I want to freeze the chicken like seven days after it's been in the fridge, you know, you're probably not going to unfreeze that chicken. It just seems like too to it's like past its prime already. I feel like maybe you should have had this conversation with me when I was like 30 not 37 just seems so he's like, I didn't realize you had a whole chicken metaphor is like all and so I was trying to do this and all I kept getting was like, um from the audience and I hate the pity. I'm like out of here talking about it's fine. You have to feel bad for me, but that's my job as a comedian to be like, okay. Why is everyone feeling sorry for me? There's a lot of gals out there freezing eggs, and I just want to My hands and I shoulder and go keep those fucking eggs frozen.


Keep just keep the eggs frozen stuff. You know that 99% of eggs. Don't get used. I'm sure it's something crazy. I got a crazy high percentage of eggs that don't get use this isn't it's you don't have to have kids expensive. Yeah. These are expensive of freezing your eggs is fucking awesome and you've just stormed out of his freaking storage fee. Listen having kids is awesome. Don't get me wrong. Yeah, but you don't have to have Kids. Yeah, this this idea that the path that everybody takes is the path. You have to have there's something about it that used to infuriate me. When I when I was younger or people would tell people with children would tell you you have to have a child. Yeah, and I'm Barb feels like a prisoner telling me that I need to commit a crime.


Yeah. I can come come with us. It's you don't have to now you don't have to I don't look out. I don't have a like a steadfast rule for anything involving human beings and their path in life as long as they're doing no harm. Yeah, I think as soon as someone does I always feel like they're trying to justify their own path. But like how many people who do certain things want you to do those things? Yeah. I appreciate the honest parents like my sisters like don't have kids and she's getting but she and it's another one of those things that in my incense it never it was less about having a kid and more about having a family and I had never at that point met a man that I wanted to to really have a family with and that was important to me.


I know it's crazy wanting a man in my life and all your canceled for that one. And so it just it hadn't you know, I'm very and then I was I hit 40 and I was like, ah shit. Am I gonna regret this? Is it something that you know, I'm more worried about looking back and being like I should have but I don't I just do those adopt I could always adopt there's so many kids who need good parents and I see Also, I am truly like that wou kind of hippie chick who's like I'm right where I should be. Yeah, I have to believe I have to believe but you are you are right where you should be so many right considering especially your past you are right where you should be?


Yeah and considering I mean even just this whole trip to Texas has been so informative because I went to go I went through the process of looking at houses just to see found at all this stuff but really I was like, oh I I can buy a house. That's a that was an amazing moment for me because I went bankrupt when I was 26 and I have worked really hard to I had to like repair my credit. I had to get a little baby $300 a month card that I paid off some phone and you know, I had to focus on that shit and I feel it was a nice moment to be like, okay. All right, I can see the path forward and and so many times in my life when I thought I wanted something like I really wanted to write for maxim.


I was 23. I recently found the proposal it's hilarious. But I was like, yeah, I want to I was I was such a such a boy like a boy's girl, you know, I just I moved a lot and the guys are always nice to me and they always let me in their Club. So I was at poker nights and bachelorette parties and all that shit where women generally weren't allowed and I had access to just the male brain and they were they felt comfortable being there discussing cells around me and I didn't judge them for it. And and that so I was like I need to write for maximum. I get these dudes. I want to write sex advice and I never really got that column. I never had I didn't know anybody to even I was living in a small town.


I was talking to Colin about this today. I was like, I was so delusional I was waiting tables and I was like the town drunk telling people when I was serving them french fries, like remember my name, it's really be fucking huge. Can you get me call flag set of fries young lady are you talking about I am pretty sure he's that you peeing in the alley the other night. That's why you gotta forgive people when they're young. Yeah, when you see someone acting really ridiculous when the young don't don't write them off forever. Yeah, I mean, it's been a lot like a bounce-back the story I think about the long fucking road that is banned even and so I didn't get that but then I ended up writing for Playboy which was even better.


It was on the internet. You know and I wanted to write for maxim. We only had magazines and it was much bigger than I could have imagined but so in the same space and so we're you know, I bet there might be another better thing. Yeah, like rejection. I love that phrase rejection is God's protection. I love that and my therapist always says action. Yeah. It's like you being rejected by a man or a woman or somebody or a life opportunity it Just because there's something better or you're a jerk felt like it just means whatever it is whether you're rejected for a job or rejected either.


You're not good enough or the system's fucked. See I may be one of those things is well. There's a lot of people to get jobs that do not deserve them and people that do deserve those jobs. Don't get them. Yeah that cronyism nepotism. There's a lot of fuckery that goes on with it, but that's okay too. But a lot of times it's a wake-up call. There's a lot of people like when you were telling people remember, my name is a lot of people that really believe there's something that they're not and the only way to find out that you are not that person is to be defeated and that's one of the reasons why I think martial arts is so important for men because men have it in their head this ridiculous idea that there's something that they're not and the best way to find out that you're something that you're not is to get squash.


Oh, yeah, so you get squashed a lot. I've eaten a lot of hot. Buh-bye. Well, anyone who gets good at Jiu-Jitsu has been fucking manhandled for a long time and to get to reach a black belt in Jujitsu or even a purple belt, which is what Andrew Yang thinks every police officer should be and I think so too. Yeah, that's yeah you get your fucking ass handed to you for years. Yeah all I mean I can think I can close my eyes just think all the times like this triangle tap tap tap tap tap my leg tap. This is like you just get you lose all the time. Most men don't have enough opportunities in life to lose losing is very important important failing and losing are so huge.


They're so important and we live in a culture that doesn't really, you know, it's obviously very success driven and everybody and you see the you know that ten years to become an overnight success or whatever. I'm like I ate so much. I was telling the story today with Colin just about how I was so delusional and I went bankrupt. I started feta c.com when I was four because there's greeting cards and t-shirts and I had this great idea and then I had no business Acumen and I drove around America highest gas prices ever in America. I think to this day for six months and I was like selling T-shirts on the beach Town people like y'all remember that they're like, it's spring break.


I'm not gonna remember anything and yeah, I was just delusional and I would just I came out here. Here and then my cousin who's my partner on a lot of stuff. I'm like, you know what we can turn this company around. I was like on the verge of bankruptcy and like we're gonna go to Costco and we're going to get some white boards and we got six hundred dollars worth of stuff and two cards. I was maxed out on my credit cards I go to pay with my credit card and they're like, we don't take credit cards because it's Costco. They only take like that one kind American Express or I think it's changed now, these are something so they only took one and they wouldn't take it and then we just had to like abandoned. Kew Gardens, why do they think that like dry erase boards is the thing that I needed in that moment spending $600 and I do tell young people who come to me for advice.


I'm like, you know, there is you have to kind of be a little delusional to in a creative path in particular because the difference between delusions and dreams is hard work like you're delusional if you're sitting in your mom's basement, you're like, I'm I'm gonna do this and you're never doing anything, but you do need a little bit of overachieving delusion to kind of push yourself. You could call it that I would just call him bishan. Yeah Mission and a trust in the process. Yeah terrible. If you're a comedian, you're terrible, right? And but you think I know a lot of two terrible communities have been hugely successful.


So I made a tribute that do those jokes thieves. But a lot of them they start out bad, but they have these moments where they get laughs if you could figure out what happened there and and then and then take those Embers and blow on them and and and use it and figure out how to recreate that and then figure out how to get better at it. It can be done. But you also have to be ruthlessly introspective and that is a thing that most people are not willing to do most people want to protect themselves from their failures and they want to pretend that it was Is other people's fault or people are plotting against them or you know, if how come they always happens to them.


All you gets all the breaks and all these that all that shit does use zero good and just pushes people away from you. It creates exact opposite the exact opposite amount of the the exact opposite kind of energy that you need to be successful. Yeah. Well you need to be successful is pain. Yeah, you need to all my best like growth moments in comedy came after I bombed like embarrassing horrific. Make those are when I got my shit together and I got better and I got my oh my God, I can't do that again. And then I got better. This has been a Serie is like been there's this big ones in my life where I was like the like it was the worst feelings I've ever had. Yeah, it's not I've had losses and fights that feel losses feel bad.


I get PTSD just talking about bombings from happening getting your ass kicked. So I'm trying to say bombing feels worse than getting your ass kicked. It really does I had One of The Comedy Store that I still remember like it was yesterday. It was it was a Monumental a guy that I was kind of having an affair with actually he was there with his friends which is even worse that I would have rather had been a thousand strangers and they kept pushing me and it was and they kept pushing me and pushing me cuz I'm nobody and I just kept drinking and drinking and drinking and I got on stage and I was like, I'm cold and afraid that was it and then I I couldn't remember anything them use it was her I said it was horrific are you know, you feel me it was everything a hundred percent.


I can't watch Open Mic nights. I can't like one of the one of the reasons why I take great comedians on the road with me. I always say funny people because there's nothing weird or to me than watching someone who's not funny and then thinking I can go be funny. Yeah. I don't I feel like nothing's funny. Like if I see someone eat shit, I'm like, oh my God. Ami doesn't work like there's no comedy. It's not real. It's just can't be done. It can't be done. This person's bombing. Nothing is funny. Nothing. They're saying makes me think. Oh, yeah. I know it's funny. And then if you go on after someone who bombs whose terrible you have to kind of reintroduce the idea of things being funny. Yeah, like it's a lot more work. Yeah just had this actually happened to me and I situation that I had no business being in which is often the case with stand up and it was they had made some deal where bilborough Is performing who's a God and then there was just a bunch of nobodies who that they had a range that would like kind of just open for him basically so that he could like do his our that he was testing because he doesn't give a fuck.


They're not here to see any of us. They're just here to see him and the girl I was the girl in between a girl who bombed and Bill and I was like, this is so much fresher. Thank God. I didn't and that instance I didn't bomb but it was you were like that audience. He is traumatized. They need to recover. They need to you need to bring them back and let them know everything's okay. Yeah, there's also a thing where you know that someone was going on after you is just way better than you and you just start judging your act and judging all of your material guys, second-guessing your tag lines. And yeah, that was like, who was it Jeff Garlin?


I was opening for him and I was just so paranoid. I got in my head the first show was added. Faster and he's like no one gives a fuck Bridget. They're here to see me, you know, like you can go. He's like, I'd I demand you go out there and bomb and he's like you need to try all new stuff. He was great. He pushed me. He's like, I don't care go out and be like there I'm gonna come out because you know him he just has like the awkward silences that he loves it. So I love when he's like no most people and this moment would be uncomfortable. It's just Silent Hill like sit down just take a load off. And yeah, yeah, I've learned a lot. I mean I learned I definitely learned more from bombing than I have from.


Yeah, that's where you learn what you definitely learn from killing to mean. Well that's just feels like feels awesome. But it also does teach you what's good in your act and the pacing and correct pacing and like how you're presenting bits and I never leave a bit alone. I live until I'm ready to film it. I'm always fucking moving things around and trying to find a better way to and you know you Find out through whether or not it works. What's your process for writing? Well, there's a bunch of different ways. Sometimes I just have an idea and I just write it down my throat. Look sometimes I'll be talking to my wife and I'm like, I got an idea and she understands. I just want a way I run away like literally run and I just write it down because I can it's like they're Slippery Fish.


Yeah, they're girl. Like, I remember that you'll never remember it. I know now that I remember it. So if a good one Pops in my head, I will literally run away for in a restaurant. I'll get up and run. Yeah and Like what the fuck is he doing? You adios? Like sometimes you sometimes think sometimes body will also sometimes if I'm like if I'm high especially and I think I'm not gonna remember that I have to say it because I don't know I won't remember while I'm writing it because I really I feel like this in the middle of writing at Mike. What was I saying? So I have to say it because it's quick right now. So I have like when I swipe down on my iPhone, there's the the audio recorder is one of the things that's built in. Yeah. That's all right wipe down.


That and start yapping that helps but the other thing is like sitting and sometimes they're just ideas that I have that I bounced around in my head while I'm driving around. I'm trying to figure out how to work it out. And then I bring them on stage raw. Sometimes I haven't even written down. Yeah just fuck around with it on stage to see if I can find a place for it. But then there's the big thing to me is also sitting in front of a computer and I know a lot of comics don't like that but some of my best bits of come from sitting down and going over the bit and going on. Over material and also writing essays like I write essays. It's all right, like a, you know, a couple thousand words, but I'll extract a sentence right and that one sentence will be a bit. But if I don't sit and write that I don't get that sentence, right, right and a lot of comments saying all right on stage.


I'm like, yeah I do too I do too. But I also make myself sit down. Look I need a new hour every two years really a new our every year because the last year is really just hammering the samurai sword down Bing. Bring its, you know honing the blade. Yeah, but the bit the metal has to be in position after year. Yeah, so I have to get something and you got like you can come up with it on your own you could just just just talk and go on stage and socializing with friends. A lot of times things come out socializing with friends good ideas will pop in my head like you're laughing and having fun. You say something crazy. Oh my God, you should use that you write that down, but there's no substitute for actually.


Rewriting. Yeah for sitting down and writing. Yeah, just sitting your ass in that chair and doing the work. It's like it doesn't hurt ya know what I tell young Comics like. Well, I really feel comfortable riding like that because it always comes out forced. Yeah get better at it. Yeah, like that's the argument that I've talked to Comics that that just do crowd work. Yeah, whatever. I do bits. It seems fake Mike. Let's because they're not good. Yeah. Yeah you get better at doing that. Do you like crowd work? I do it if some shit is going on. Yeah, but you know, I just I'll do it. Occasionally just to have fun. Yeah, but I feel like there's this it's a weird sort of fake immediacy.


Like there's a fake energy like oh my God, it's coming out of nowhere. Yeah, you know, this is so much funnier than it really is is that people are laughing really loud and LOL because they know that you're coming up with it in the moment, right? It's fun sometimes but there's no substitute for real bits. Yeah, like a real killer bit. That's what I Like when I would listen to Richard Pryor, yeah or Sam Kinison. I wanted those fucking perfectly honed chunks. Yeah, you know that's like chappal. I mean God I watch his stuff and like he is like a master class just the way that he constantly misdirections like the joke. So he's on you. Yeah. Yeah.


Yeah, just so I mean that opening to the most recent one the Sticks and Stones. Yeah just it's just How he manages to bring it back to the Anthony Bourdain thing and then he's like and this guy I mean, he's just it's he's just a master. You see somebody who's so gifted at that. They're so dedicated. Did you ever I feel that this way about Colin Quinn actually that New York Special that he did you ever see that don't have a full Leaf it is I was genius. I he's a genius I watched it and re-watch it again immediately because I was like, what the fuck how the fuck did he just do that? He tells the whole history of New York. And it's all in jokes Hank Seinfeld directed it.


It's on Netflix is genius. I've never seen anything like it really it was like the history of New York in an hour unappreciated. So unappreciated. Yeah. Yeah and Comics appreciate I remember one time I did tough crowd and Colin was working the he was warming up the audience and he just did a stand-up. So there's an audience there to see tough crowd. And Colin is just doing stand-up for the audience and it is Good. I remember thinking afterwards like while his stand-up was so much better than the show itself. Yeah, I was like, it's kind of interesting. Yeah, like people don't know how good he is. He's so get his red state blue state that he dead is genius.


It's like it aired on CNN and now it's on Netflix, but it was a roast of all 50 states. It's freakin hilarious. Amazing. He's yeah, he's really under I feel like underappreciated. What what have you learned in your time off? Like what have you learned about yourself? Your comedy have you what are your I can live without it and learned that I can survive. Well, yeah without it. I mean you're at Twitchy. Oh, well, I got Twitchy the one time I did it. I did it in Houston. I did a weekend at The Improv, but then I got Twitchy about giving people the coal bed. I got worried and I'm like what if I got it and then I gave it to somebody. Yeah, that would worry me. So getting weirded out about that. I got weirded out about like, you know, someone who's compromise getting it.


Yeah my carelessness. Then I thought about I was like also then there's people that are in the audience. Like are you responsible if people come to see you and then someone in the audience gets covid like are you responsible for not directly not directly, but it's a secondhand feel guilt free and I'll feel guilt free. I give you find out that a fan who loved you but was overweight and they came to see you and they got covid and died after a show like yeah, you feel horrible you feel horrible if you are so I decided okay, this is not I don't know if there's a way to do this where people don't get sick. Sick, what about the drive-thrus aren't people doing that that seems whack. I know loves them. Bert loves them. But first crazy.


Yeah, so it's like it's hard to charge is having a blast. He loves it. Yeah, but Birches wanted to perform, you know, and he figured out a way to do it. I mean, I'm pretty sure that the drive-in movie comedy thing was his idea. Wow. Wow, I think he's the one that started doing it and he's the one for sure who's doing it on the biggest scale. He told me he did a show ago. How many With over 700 cars. Oh, wow, 700 cars. That's crazy. A lot of people. Yeah, you gotta figure that. Silly 1400 people. Yeah, maybe more. Yeah, and you know, he said at the end of it there were flashing their license like a fucking UFO and that's kind of cool. Listen. He just wanted to be out there. Yeah, you know, he just wanted to be out there doing stand-up and it's going well.


He's selling out all over the place. I feel bad for the comedians who were like just getting that momentum, you know the ones that were grinding and grinding And grinding because I've been thinking a lot about this just with covid how much momentum was just stopped all over the world just the momentum for musicians, you know, I heard the story about a musician people starting businesses just stopped. Yeah people going to college sports but these comedians who aren't making money or words musicians who aren't making money, but where is this guy only make money touring? Yeah, but we're just about to start making money, right? Maybe not even like owning like me. Alle Alle makovsky shoes.


She was opening for me just really starting to get paid work and then was actually starting to headline and then went away. Yeah, I mean that's what living with her mom. Oh, wow. Yes. Nope. There's no money. There's no money. Like how do you make money? Yeah, the only way a comic survives today is if they started a podcast before all this shit. Yeah, and I have been telling Comics this from the fucking jump. We want to tell me to start mine. Yes, and you listen I dead you told me I remember where I was it was at the comedy store and you were like start a podcast. I was like Joe Rogan tells you started podcast. I guess I'll said yeah, it's very successful now. Yeah, but the thing is it's it's a vehicle for you to be independent and to not just make money but also to get your voice out there.


Yeah, you can get your opinions out there in a way that you don't have anybody leaning over your shoulder. Like I had there was a time where I was doing the rounds with some radio people where There was like some offers for me to do a radio thing. And I was like, but this going to be like someone telling me what I can and can't say right is going to be someone bringing me guests like this guy and we come in and that gets going to come in and like I could probably make do with that but it would also be those there's uncomfortable moments. I remember when I did radio where the I knew the DJ did not want me there right? They weren't a fan of my comedy or the yeah DJ's are weird people and so they're like comics in a lot of ways but a lot of them are like Comics it never did comedy.


Right right this like insecurities about the comics that are out there battling. Yeah, you know, I remember one guy was mad because he said it looked like you had about two hours sleep. He smelled like liquor. I'm like, yeah. Yeah. I'm a comic. Yeah. Yeah did have two hours sleep. I did smell like liquor. We were up having a good time. I had a show last night motherfucker. Yeah, you know, we were up until four o'clock in the morning. Just laughing and then I came here. X yeah, that's what happened. Fuck do you expect? Yeah, what'd I do man look median, but there's something about the the person who just the comic the like a lot of DJ's I think secretly wanted to be Comics.


Yes, because they'll try to be funny the try to be witty witty morning guys. Yeah, but they never they never put their balls in a wheelbarrow got to that stage. Yeah. They never did. They are like no radio sticking with the podcast. Well, I just didn't Aunt I didn't think anybody was gonna hire me but but the problem was I was worried about having a place where I could just say what I wanted to say always knew someone's going to tell me not to do something yeah like it's so annoying. Yeah when you say something funny and someone's like you can't say that you fuck there was an episode of Fear Factor once for this lady could not reach her hand into this Barrel. There's this barrel of worms to pull out a piece of paper and the piece of paper I I would say you have to eat one were more no worms, and I'm pretty sure she was vegan too.


So she couldn't eat a worm stuff to kill a thing hilarious. So I go just put your hand in there and grab the paper just like I can I could but you definitely can trust me. You can do it you put your hand in there you grab the paper and you do it I go it's not that hard. I'm telling you. It's all in your head. I'm going to help you through it and and she's like, I just can't I can't I go you're saying you can't but that's not true. It's difficult, but you can I go watch out. I'm going to do it I go want to watch and I put my hand in there and I pull out a piece of paper. I would see that ago. That's why only men get to be president. Ha ha ha she was so mad at me. If I go. I'm joking I go you can do it like but NBC wouldn't have them cut it out.


And I remember this conversation I had with the producers. I was like, why can't you say that I go you understand I'm joking, right? They will have people going to get mad. I go. Yeah, a lot of people get mad at jokes. Yeah, but it's pretty clear that I'm joking and you I'm a comedian and everybody else does too. So what are we doing? What are we doing? Yeah, I remember that feeling of like it's going to be that it's going to be that all day. Yeah, we got all the time. It's going to be that but podcasts are the only place where a comic can say, whatever the fuck they want. Yeah, but what I've been telling comics from the jump is this is the only place where you can do this. Yeah. Well, you don't have any other people do and thankfully a lot of people have listened particularly like Tom Segura and casino like Tom and I have a conversation. They're awesome. They're move down here.


Shriek, she's I just love her. Yeah. I hooked them up my real estate agent. Hmm. So we were in the middle of this lockdown and me and Tom on the phone. He goes dude. Thank God, you told me to do this podcast. Yeah, he was what the fuck he goes. I was making so much money touring and then I was like basing My Lifestyle off of that. No one ever thought the plug would be the yeah. No one ever saw this coming but not just that they've established who they are through that podcast. Yeah in a way like you realize how silly he is. Yeah. Silly they are together here. Yeah, they're great. They're my feet. Well, they're not my favorite comp the other art. Okay. They're my favorite comedy cop. Yeah, but there's a bunch of other ones like Bonnie McFarlane.


Yeah and Rich Vos. Yeah and Natasha Leggero and Moshe Kasher. There's a few that work. Yeah, and it's the answer to these people that say like so comedians should never date other comedian. So yeah my whole Theory one headshot per couple. Yeah. It's a good theory most of the time. Yeah, but like all theories there's always a yeah, is there some that work? Obviously, I think they don't I the thing I love about Tom and they just don't take themselves very serious at all at all for their opinions. Yeah, then and then they're not the people even though they're super successful. They're not the people that tell you what you should and shouldn't do ya know is that shit's gross I don't want to do that. That's what it's like you're saying earlier about the just letting people kind of find their path because I what worked for me isn't going to work for thee and this is what we're hearing from.


You know, these kind of extremes is What's right for me is what's right for everybody. That's why for me is what you have to do. Yeah, and if I think something you must comply. Yeah, if I believe something you can't say a thing, you can't think of a thing you must do this you got to adhere to this or that, you know, there's just so much Madness in the world when it comes to this shit. It's weird. It's interesting. Like I understand, you know, Kanye clearly. I pray for him Kanye and I understand right when he started wearing the Maga hat. I was like I get it I get it because there was so much pressure especially like in Allah and when you're living in that liberal bubble State, there's so much ideological pressure.


I could feel it. I could feel myself not wanting to say things and that's why I just was like fuck it. I'm saying whatever I want on Twitter, but I'll pay the consequences whatever they might be and I'm not going to censor myself and you know, I have the whole theory of on Twitter if you get like a lot of followers for one tweet you You immediately tweet something. That's the opposite so that you can weed out all the like zealots and ideologues because that's the only way to purify following from like the the radicals. Yeah and does it work it does work. I feel like because I can see it in my mentions for the most part my like the people who follow me or like in on the joke and there's some really smart funny people and I love it when they contribute to the joke.


I'll need my mentions because they're usually freaking hilarious and then there's always like One idiot who's like oh this is the most obvious grift I've ever seen. I'm like, yeah. Yeah that grift word this too many dorks of the using that word. I know a grifter because I like using the word. There are a lot of people that are fucking grifters. Yeah, but there's too many people using that word. It's a good word. It's one of those words one word. It's a really fun. It's a fun word to say it has a good accurate. Yes. I'll tell you where to find grifters. Here's a fun thing to do that I should start. The segment on my podcast. I love reading Yelp reviews of Psychics.


You want to talk about the fucking grifters? I could read these four hours. You want comedy Joe go read psychic reviews on Yelp. Yeah there they are nothing but grift. They the there like I came in and he didn't remember my name. He should have known my name when I walked in the scenes that are set. Like I showed up in this woman was babysitting her. Grandchild and then she needed me to give them a ride. I'm like these people who are psychics are insane. It's amazing. All of your audience should take a moment. Go read some psychic Alvin Yelp reviews when you're feeling down you immediately feel better about life. All these people that want you to know that they know, uh psychic this real like dude.


I'm telling you she knows she just knows things. You got to talk to her. I had a girl my podcast who is addicted to psychics and I was like, no no, come on. How bad could it have been? She was like I spent $60,000 on psychics last year. I'm like, okay. Yeah, that's an addiction. Wow. How did you have that much money? I mean, I think maybe he had good mushy had decent money. I've got to making money if you make more than $60,000 a year. You're probably not that much of a moron, right you've done. Well, I mean you have that money to blow on psychics. That's that's what's confusing about it. That's crazy. It's crazy and I think it got to the point where her psychic started feeling guilty because he told her that she had to like cut her off that's like a drug dealer seems has bro you taking in too much of this crack?


I thought she was kidding when she said her psychic Cut Her Off. Yeah my God, that's funny. Amazing. It's a whack. It was a wacky and our view is it dirty people. There are evil people that those people in the Seance people. Those are even eviler your father talking to me from Beyond the Grave. I Sense, he misses you. Yeah, give me money. Give me money. I was talking to you Dad Dad. Do you believe in any kind of psychic powers? I think I think it is. It is likely that there are evolving senses that we are aware of and that we recognize but that no one in this current state of evolution has a handle on how to control them.


I think there are moments when you think about people and they call you. I think there are times when you know, someone's lying. Saying there's a feeling you get when you know, someone secretly hates you this right is this weird things where you go? I knew that fucker. Yeah something and I don't know as always your body language that you're picking I could be that yeah, it could be that but there's also things like when you think about someone in the call, yeah people say, oh that's a coincidence it you're right. It could be a coincidence. Yeah, but I'm not buying that all the time. I think sometimes it's a coincidence, but I think sometimes there's a strange inner connected. Ray to life. Yeah, and I think that we used to be animals with no language.


Yeah, and then we develop language and you are basically when you're talking to me when you and I are talking and you're speaking with your language you're making sounds and I read your mind through those sounds and I recognize those sounds mean particular things. I put them into my own organization of what they mean to me and they mean different things to different people which is why it gets things get confusing. Using which also why I'm so ruthlessly opposed to compliance because you're forcing me to accept your definition of what these sounds mean and what that means in terms of like what the actual context of it is and what what what what the intent is behind these sounds and it's creepy and sneaky.


Yeah widely debunked. Yes, I think exactly wild and pinion drives me. Easy, but also just words you can and can't say and yeah, but there's something about human beings where I feel like there is a connection that's like almost there. Yeah. It's like it comes together. Sometimes it's like just every now and then you get it but you don't always have it there's something and when you do mushrooms, you have it in a big way. Yeah, you know one of the things of Ayahuasca when they first discovered Ayahuasca one Of the ingredients that was later recognized as being already discovered to be a compound called harm Ian.


They started calling it telepathy mean so the first people that were studying Ayahuasca the first Scholars that were studying it where the researchers were calling it telepathy mean until they realize that you know, do the rules of scientific nomenclature did already been established that was harming the so New with the thing but they were calling it to let the theme because through this compound people were having these shared experiences without talking and then when they relayed these experiences, they were actually communicating without talking and they were saying there's a type of telepathy that's possible with this drug. I think I think we are becoming something and if we don't interfere when probably will technologically and with neural link and all these other crazy things if we don't, Don't interfere.


I think we will ultimately become more and more in tune with that our ability to sense things and communicate non-verbally and read each other. Non-verbally. There's something about there's something about us where we connect in this way. That is you can't measure it. Yeah, put it on a scale you can put a tape measure to it, but there's something to it. I agree my my best friend and I have always had that psychic connection and we just thought the adults. And which is like we were in that they suck. So we always developed it and to this day I can be like call me Sarah tell him telepathically and she will literally within like a day.


It feels like I'll hear from her randomly and chill. It's just that we like intuitively know and we need each other and I worked with autistic kids for a while and part one of my many jobs and I kind of have a weird theory that autism and the rise of it is the human brain and evolution and it just hasn't were kind of catching it mid Evolution because those kids have amazing gifts. I saw some crazy shit working with autistic kids just things that didn't make any sense like my one example, I was working with a kid and he was nonverbal and we were in the playroom and he was you know, he kept he was obsessed with flies.


He would get obsessed with different things at different times and he would Look up and then look back and look up and he was in his we were like what I thought it was locked. It wasn't and he runs out of the room suddenly runs through the laundry room runs into the kitchen and then midair grabs the fly as its flying. Yeah. I saw this I was running on his heels trying to catch him. I was like what the fuck and then he brings it back into the playroom and he would like basically play with the fly until eventually a diet. Yeah. And that was just one of those. I mean there were so many moments like that with all these different kids where I'm like they're tapped into something else.


Yeah, and if you lived in a world and say you had a sixth sense say that you had say that you lived in a world where nobody could see and you were the only person who could see you'd be banging your fucking head on the wall to if you could see and everyone was like, what are you talking about this so sometimes I wonder if it's not there not like you're saying maybe the brain is evolving. And we're just catching. It just doesn't fit in society. So they're they're feeling because there's a lot that I don't know. I just saw so many of the the autistic kids are just amazing. Some people have that feeling of when it comes to talk to autism and autistic kids that maybe that's an emerging type of Consciousness.


And that even though we're looking at today as being a detriment right that it might be the standard in the future. Yeah. I mean they have amazing because like you were saying We're animals and we've done I've always been fascinated with how out of touch we are with our instincts because they still run the show for all of us. Most people. Yeah, most people right now. There's so much fear in that you can feel it everywhere. There's so much fear. Yeah. Everyone's in fear fear fear fear fear everywhere and that drives so much of this behavior that we're seeing like tribalism and trying to be a tyrant and rule over people and feeling like you have to stop.


Anything that doesn't make you fit that even that language like I don't feel safe. What does that because of words like what does that even fucking mean? I don't feel safe. I'm not okay. You don't feel safe by my words, but youth like burning down a city is supposed to be okay, you know, it's a weird we live in like weird times wherever there's so much but I feel like I think it was really shown in the tsunami. Remember that huge tsunami that was in like 2006 was it or she doesn't M5 no not the one in Japan the one that was found in the ocean. Yeah, and all the animals ran away and All Humans ran to go see all the shells and shit and why the ocean was there are tons of people who drowned because they were like what's happening?


Yeah, and that's just evidence to me of how out of touch with I wonder if our ancestors would have made that same mistake where they're like, what's happening? I don't know. I don't know or would they have been like we're getting that we're following the animals. Well, there's a real Like what kind of what kind of understanding of animals and of the land and and storms coming and all sorts of shit that animals seem to tune into did we lose? Yeah, when we you know houses and did we lose that is what I'm wondering Wonder right or did we just never have it and we're morons. Maybe well it don't you think also, we're so much more capable of expressing ourselves.


We're so much more occupied with Tasks and things and whether it's information or computers or TV or different people that were talking to constantly that the the mind is overwhelmed. Yeah, and that how much time do you spend in the woods? I spend a lot of time in nature, but when you're there and you hear nothing, I love it. It's weird. Oh I learned like there's a weird quiet to the to the mountains. Like there's a hazard to yeah, I love it. And it also tumbling because you know, you ain't shit not It uh, that's why I love the desert. I love it because it puts me in my place. Yeah. It's like everything in the desert has evolved to survive the harshest conditions on Earth and everything.


There is either trying to kill you or we'll kill you. Yeah, and there's something about that that painful Evolution that all the plants and animals had to undergo that just speaks to me and just even the harsh. I mean, it's like 9 o'clock in the morning. You're like it's so So high like I'm going to die and it's all so it doesn't care about you know, this ecosystem has existed long before you were ever here and it's all working together. The bugs are working with the lizards with the snake and the plants and the little water that there is and the coyotes and all this shit is working together. Yeah, and it's man maintaining this system, but I love that. I mean that's the thing that I feel like people are losing when they're looking down into these demonic boxes all day long is that Connection to you know, having your feet kind of being made of mud, but also made of stars that famous quote butchering but we are made of Stardust that we are a part, you know, I'll look out at the stars and be like what the fuck I'm part of this.


I'm not even high and I can experience that trip of yeah, we aren't separate from I'm not looking at the stars. It's like I'm part of that crazy and we're all just it's such a miracle that were here in this time and space. Yeah, and it's such a wild trip and we're way and we have more than we've ever had in the in the history of humans and we're wasting it tearing each other apart a actually hurts my soul. When is a lot of wasted energy for fast. Why when I see people, you know people like how you okay Little Miss captain of the fence writing team, you should ride fences. I'm gonna get a juicer that says Captain offense writing.


You are truly the captain. Listen, I don't boot. I'm not married to any of my thoughts. Yeah, I don't think I think it's good to question everything including yourself. Yeah, and this some thoughts like they don't murder people. Yeah. Don't steal don't rape don't you know don't like tell it be said a lot of things like real clear people don't drown old people like yeah, there's a lot of like real clear ones, but but when it comes to whether it's government or Behavior or ideology or any of the things that we hold so rigid I think it's really dangerous. It's really dangerous to look at things the way we look at things.


We did have these non pliable opinion. Yeah, and also connect all of our own feelings of importance to these opinions being valid. Yeah connect who you are as a person like who your value as a person to whether or not the opinions that you hold are Yeah fight to the death for those opinions. Well, that would comment. It's so common. That was like all the Trump supporters who are in my comments. It was like I attacked them personally, like I had gone to their house and personally attacked them in their mom. Yeah and told them that they were shit and like you guys you can't personally identify with politicians are the biggest pieces of shit ever.


They are dropped on politician. That's why we like exotic drain the swamp. I love it. R not listening to Hollywood. I'm like your your hero is Hollywood, you know what he's talking about. Well, that's hilarious when people call you a Hollywood. Like what does that mean? No, because I'm in Show Business. No, it's I just I feel like we deserve better. Yeah, we don't you know in this election makes me feel like we definitely do we deserve and but we don't but yeah, we deserve this because this is where we've left it. Yeah left it to this. Like nobody wants to be fucking president. There's a few people that you could get behind like Tulsi. There you go. I just I think that's who she is. I mean, I don't think there's any bullshit there, but this is very few of those the people that are willing to run for president.


This is the kind of people that are willing to do this because most of the people most of the people that think about the girl whom I fucking skeletons have a friend of mine. That's funny. But that's what it is. I mean, I was just thinking it would be a shit job and I would hate it and I would hate myself because I think by the time you get there in order to even maneuver, you have to sell yourself out so many times. Times that you don't even know what you think about how many people are just waiting to attack anybody who's running for president? Yeah, and about the way they ramped up their attacks and in the machine behind it. It's not as simple as like, I'm Joe Biden and I think Donald Trump is a fucking loser. Yeah, so I'm going to say that now there's like a whole machine with literally millions of dollars on the line because if our team gets in there, then we can push our agenda we can get certain bills passed we can It certain legislation through we can make sure that certain regulations the court.


Yes, and it can literally one way or the other impact corporations in this spectacular way. Yeah, so they have to really really put a lot of effort into it. So the idea that that we allow that that's that's where things get crazy like it should be it's almost like if you want to run for president you almost should have no help like no one no would be like Grassroots like they take q and they take away your phone and they keep you in a hotel room and they just bring you place to place and no one gets to talk to you. Isn't that it won't give oh, she's pretty Grassroots or is she has like a whole organization of the tribe, but Justice will be going over the squad. What a comment they also have like the Whatsit.


What is it is it's a like Democratic Justice League something friends like the it's a pretty socialist. I think organizational. She's got a lot of people that also agree with her. That are also in politics and they also work together and you know, and then she's compromised some of her own Democratic socialists of yeah. Well, I can't wait until she's a Republican and like 10 years. Well, you're telling me that you would read some of your ships. Oh my God, I'm going to find it for you. I just hit it is it is like it was a part of the book when I was waiting tables telling everyone remember my name and drunk at all the time. I was I was super there's a whole part where I was Talking about Bush.


I didn't know anything about politics at all. But I was I was just so I was lived hard like the definition by definition of what what they the right would consider a lived hard. That was well you weren't hardened yet by the world. I mean, I was pretty hardened and I'd had enough shit up in Pre prior to 23 that yeah, you're still hopeful that these sort of Airy fairy. Idealistic Notions of what you know, what should be done with our culture and that this would work and with no understanding of Economics. No understanding of I think it's good to be that hopefully I don't think you should go burn down government buildings and be like, yeah, let's tear it all down.


But I think it's good to have that idealistic. Hope in your what does that famous quote like your your if you don't if you're not a democrat in your 20s, you don't have a heart and if you're not a republican in your 30s, you don't have a brain. Rain or something like that or you're not a good old and it's an old. Yeah, it's an old saying if you're not a liberal as a youth you have no heart if you know a conservative as your older, you have no brain time, and I'm not really either because you know, I'm not socially conservative at all me neither. I mean, that's where they it's funny when people were like, oh, she's just a grifter. She's gotten red pills and she's gonna be on the right now and then the right we'll start talking about porn or something on like a thank God. I'm not one of them are sex or whatever weird.


It weird chat. Yeah, or you know, whether or not I mean, you know these ideas that you have to be one or the other is where it's so stupid. Yeah, you can hold both things. That is what we should be doing. We should be holding both things and evaluating them. Yeah. Well, especially it's really difficult for me when people want to restrict other people's ability to express themselves or do things whether it's you know gay rights or trans rights or civil rights or women's rights or anytime you want to stop people from doing something that literally has nothing to do with you.


Yeah, you know, like the gay rights one was the the gate marriage one was always weird to me like of when I was seven years old. I was seven years old. We moved to Florida and I had this can't this Cuban friends name is Candy candido those last name was candido and they call them candy. I love that and his dad. So mad he had a newspaper? He's slamming it down on the fucking table and we're like, what's the matter? He's like taking to let these fags marry each other. Oh my gosh. She's I was how old are you 11? Yeah. I was 11 because I've moved from San Francisco. So I was 11 and I remember thinking what a fucking idiot. This guy's a grown man. See I lived in San Francisco from 7 to 11.


So I was like, I was right down the street from Lombard. Yeah, so we were around like my next door neighbor's they would get Naked there were these gay guys, they would get naked with my aunt and they would smoke pot for The Bongo. That was my life. When I was seven years old. So used to gay people. Yeah, so normal for yeah that being around this guy when I was 11. I was like, this is so weird. So we as I moved from float from San Francisco to Florida in Gainesville, Florida, which was so dumb. Yeah apartment complex. So it was like people weren't doing so good and they were so dumb. Yeah. It's too hot too hot to be smart.


It's something I think about Florida's like God damn it. So hot down there can't be smart. It's hard. It's hard, you know that's gone. But I was just saying that like so I don't understand why people who are conservative like why if you're a fiscally conservative that makes sense if you're financially conservative. If you believe in the Second Amendment, you have all these ideas about rights we have rights, but why do you give a fuck if people get married? Like what? I do know Caitlyn Jenner when she transitioned was against gay marriage. Wow, weird sort of always been more of a traditional girl. What? Oh, yeah on the Ellen Show Alan Alan Alan confronted about it.


Wow, it was like what what what happened to us? What that what I don't understand what well, she's a republican, right? It should Adele. I don't know but probably not huh, but with your report, I think so maybe but when you're a republican, that's one of those things you're supposed to just describe things like they've They've accepted that that's not a battle. They're winning. Well, it's evolution of the culture. Well at a certain point in time, like don't you know any gay people that are cool. Yeah, but you really give a fuck if they get married. Yeah. Marriage is dumb. Anybody dumb enough to get married should be unhappy giveaway ever shit.


We were in Arizona and this guy was talking about his daughter and he and she is gay and divorce and I was like, I'm glad the gays no divorce all about an hour. Probably going to regret fighting for that marriage think he's like they're paying for half an hour more neither like gosh it has on the podcast years ago, and she's been married and divorced a couple times and she was telling me all these women. She's got to pay Almay to alimony to I go what's that all about girls bitches are crazy say that has been divorced is paying all these women alimony that especially like this. Like she fucked them so hard they can never work again.


Yeah, but no you used to be in a relationship with a successful person. You're not anymore time to get a job. No, they can't thank you. She licked her pussy so good. They just confuse the can't fill out forms that the can't work anymore. Who's that up is that I'm accustomed to those. I have a custom. I think it's I think it's right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I need pussy payment. That's it. Was right. Yeah. I think it is. It's what I think marriage is is great. If you love someone so much you're willing to do something stupid. Yeah, that's my situation. Yeah, but I just think it's you know, and it makes sense.


If you have family makes sense you have child because the way I felt like I felt like having a child is way more of a commitment than anything Financial. You're really making a human being bring them in the world and you're responsible for them for at least 18 years. At least now it's like 25 dude. I know people that are 42 over their parents, right? That's yeah, but enduring covid it's hot. Yeah. Yeah, we've all become like European families. Yeah. It's intergenerational. Well, you gotta survive. Yeah, really. The reality is like it's not a bad idea to pull all your resources together and try to survive because each other right? Yeah because we really are at a Crossroads. Yeah, like when when you realize it makes us realize how good we had it for so many years when you know, Oh people the economy was booming people could be independent and out there supporting themselves.


But then when all that shit is literally cut in half like you got to make do you have to figure it out? Yeah, and I think it's better for people to be around other people. Yes, because all my friends who have been isolated, you know people it's way more open here. Oh, yeah, my friends and Allah are losing their minds who have been alone cuz it's been going on like six months. Now, there's way more open here, isn't it? Yeah way more open. It's my love it. Yeah, it feels normal. Yeah. It does it just feel you wear a mask Christ. Yeah, go to a restaurant. It's crazy. It's amazing. It's nice nice and they me. It's been nice to just feel kind of what normal was retail stores are open you go to retail store put a mask on an LA.


Definitely. I mean, it's when I was walking my dog and I lay every single day. I have to avoid a crazy. There's a guy with a machete there was and then I walked out and then I was two days every walk I go on there's basically like a crazy homeless for Young woman who's out alone and they're having some kind of breakdown and it gets worse and worse every day. It's like it is deteriorating faster than I could have even imagined and it makes me mad because the government doesn't give a fuck about me. They don't care about my safety. I'm supposed to have endless compassion for the homeless and they don't care that there's a guy with a machete having a having a moment.


I don't care. They can't do anything about it. They cannot there only. Job is to keep somewhat keep me safe as a citizen. That is what they if that why am I paying taxes? If they can't do that? This is why I'm like fuck you California. You got to be conscious to keep these politicians fed. Okay, they need to make sure that I'm not getting attacked. Well, I like my dog, but that's the problem with some with some places big is La there's like a diffusion of responsibility thing that you get to when you get to a numbers that are so high when you get like 20 million people You know that was there's like a expression about how not an expression but there's an example about how when people see someone getting attacked a give there's only one person there and someone's getting attack you feel responsible to help but if you're in a crowd and every time it's on right now, yeah, everyone assume someone else is going to jump in and nobody does anything.


Yeah, but it's not a nobody feels responsible. It's been notably worse, you know there there has to be something people are paying tons of money. I was in vain. As I was in Brentwood, they these people have paying millions of dollars in taxes and they have encampments across the street from their house their kids playing. Yeah, it's not safe for though. You know, they're there something has to we were it's interesting too. I mean, Jamie and I were talking about this because they before just the way I don't even know if they know how many actual homeless people are there because I volunteered ones to be part of the homeless count and that's how they Count the homeless is volunteers who go through La for like one weekend and count as many homeless people as I can and you write down what streets you're wrong.


Yeah, and you like going little groups and how much fun I didn't I never I was out of town that weekend my aunt was like, please don't do that, but I literally was out of town that weekend. So I ended up not being able to do it. But I was like, oh cool This Is How They count the homeless, but that doesn't seem like a very Very good measure of how many there are homeless people up there. I bet it's probably twice as many as it actually reports. How are you getting? Yeah, that's a lot of people 70,000 they say now there's a New York City has 80,000. Wow, there's absolutely they should be until a way better place a better place to be homeless.


Yeah, I'll his like tolerable well because now there is an underpass. Yeah, but during covid they've loosened all those restrictions. So used to be like you couldn't block the sidewalk. Yeah, and you credit with your we saw somebody grilling a frickin Lake. It was a huge fire on a grill on the side of the road. It was like a Hibachi or some shit like one just having a grilled middle and there's women with their strollers trying to watch it's Madness. I don't know about and I have that's the one I feel like it's the one problem if I could solve I would focus on solving it because it's on homelessness because it's such a Crossroads of Economics mental illness addiction and so many things that are abuse I was watching a video about this kid and he was 28 and he's been homeless literally on the street since he was 9 years old is he was in a car with his mom they were living in a car till they were 11 and then from 11:00 on he was on the street.


Yeah, it was terrible and he was talking about I mean he he had no teeth like his front teeth were gone. He had his face reconstructed his arm smash. Somebody beat him up with a bat he You know, I've been sexually abused. It didn't have any socks. He didn't have any shoes. He didn't have anything. Yep. He had, you know, he talked about the small amount of clothes he had and it's kind of weird because he was you know, really for a person who has been homeless and on the street and this horrible life since he was nine kind of seemed pretty together like the way he was talking communicating leasing this video and you know you realize this is the thing about people when you hear mad at someone So if you're mad at someone for their behavior, like so savior, if you're a gay person, you're mad that Caitlyn Jenner doesn't believe in gay marriage, even though she wanted to transition and wants you to call her a woman now.


Instead of being mad and I guess you could be mad at the idea. But I think what we really need to start doing is look like what what happened? How'd you get like what all what are all the things that took place in your life that that you turned into this right now? Like what are those things? This is the concept of determinism right is the concept that there is no real free. Will right. Everyone is sort of an accumulation of all the experiences. They've had their genetics their life. All the different factors that are out of their control along with his decisions that they've made because of these factors and all your emotions and you catch genes and drug addiction and all these different things and it brings you to this point and I think this is the thing with homeless people that we need to take into consideration as well because when you see some of his homeless, you know, like oh this fucking loser.


Oh, they're a drug addict. I get away from my house the amount of undoing you have to have to take a 40 year old person. Person who's grilling in front of a house in Venice with Heroin tracks all over their arm and make them a reasonable contributor. Yeah healthy person who can you know kind of do anything and I know I know so much on doing halves. I do have endless compassion, but on the other hand, there's a lot of entitlement there's a lot of entitlement and that in the homeless Community there is but they don't have anything or give you don't have anything and you'll get people who have things like this is The things you're seeing with a lot of these riots a lot of the Looting and all the craziness.


It's like Haves and Have Nots. Yeah and a half knots along these motherfuckers have why do they have this especially during covid? Because everybody has nothing right? These homeless people don't have anything the yeah, he'll entitled because they don't have anything and you do and there's a weird thing that people people have this thought that if you have something and they don't have it it's because there's an injustice and you have contributed. Riveted to this Injustice or you've caused this Injustice. That's where the entitlement comes and this is a real problem in the way Americans are particularly. Think about in particular think about economics. Yeah. It's resentment politics. Yeah, it's all ours that meant I didn't get a lot of people to agree with you. Oh, yeah.


Most people most people also don't have good things. Like I was reading this tweet from this girl who's talking about, you know, like we need to start going into the suburbs and going into these people's houses. Yeah, and then Throat Eat the Rich. Yeah, that's a big thing right now and I was like put what he's talking about with so you're 24. Okay, what do you think is going to have on your 44 and you're one of those people? Yeah. He's actually happy with that. Yeah happy when you're tired because you've been working all day trying to achieve a dream and you're exhausted and you see these people outside your house. How the fuck do you have this house? How are you in that house? I'll comfortable as fuck. Yeah, we're out here. You know, I'm sure you've seen some of those people.


So it's video. There is one video from I think Kenosha and this guy, I'm not sure if that's one was from but I it just stuck with me. He was like yelling at the they had smashes windows and he was like, I have fucking mouths to feed. He's like, do you want everybody to vote for Trump? I have fucking mouths to feed. What are you doing? And like they'd smash his where you know, people know what they're doing. They don't know what they're doing. And so many so many of the kids on the streets are truly kids like 17s children that I wear your parents. We have a fucking Hamilton problem the kid in the Kenosha that one up killing those day on Instagram. Honey, go have fun this motherfucker. He's not liking my shit resentment resentment resentment.


Yeah, we you know, we have a lot of problems and there's a lot of us and we could all like we could all do with some housecleaning and compassionate. Yeah, I think compassion for each action clean up your own backyard get your life together do your best. Nobody wants to do that shit. They want to blame everyone exactly wants to clean. In the shit in their front yard and not do drugs that are you know, they're spending all their money on they want to go out and be like the lids are ruining. My legs are like burn down a fucking building. It is weird how this certain environments to just tolerate like homelessness and craziness and then those folks find those environments like Venice.


Yeah, like Venice is just presses. It's a breeding ground for it is crazy. There's just so much. It's such a that it is really just so Complex. I don't even know how you been but I don't I do wonder why some obviously some cities are doing things that where it isn't festering and exploding in some cities are so why don't what are what are the cities that have it somewhat under control? We're where they problem busing them. Well a people like like Giuliani was when you know, he was the Law and Order guy we are now go It's a good question.


I don't know. I don't know what they do with them. I don't know how they help them. I don't know what they do. There was an upper west side thing recently where they had a hotel and they had like 300 homeless guys living in this hotel, but then they started like jerking off in front of people and you know taking shits on people's car stuff DeBlasio how to move them out and now people are pissed off at him for taking these people out and what you know is really is mostly men. Mostly homeless men and was really crazy was this article that was written about it was so Distorted it was like homeless families are being relocated when their kids are just now going to school like first of all, yes, literally the this is pulling at the heartstrings.


There's been a bunch of things are doing lately to pull at the are this but this was one of the most Preposterous articles that I read. I read one of them was their calling they're now calling homeless people the on housed now, it's persons experiencing houseless nests. We're going to be canceled for calling them hoes the unhoused now it's part l a time period As we have so it's upgraded unhoused the on housed. This is an article about people that were putting Rocks Under underpasses that when homeless people had moved out of certain areas. They were going on to these underpasses and putting these enormous rocks so that people could get intense in and there were saying do you understand what you're doing to the on housed? These are the only places they can go to escape the elements the reason why they go into that under that it's literally the difference between life and death.


There there. Is that there that's also somewhat of a myth because there is This there are bad sometimes to go empty because people don't want to give up their drugs and weapons. Yeah, so there's the idea that like, oh these they don't have anywhere else to go isn't always true. Well, they're drug addicts Bridget. You need to take a little bit more compassion when you're making these statements because these people that are drug addicts. They don't know what to do. It is. It's an either drugs, isn't it? Let some just do their drugs. Does it feel like we're on the backside of Empire? Yeah feels like Rome. Purple, yeah. Yeah. I mean one thing is a Douglas Murray said when I interviewed him, I guess I don't interview anybody right I talk to people let's remember that when I was talking he was saying that at the end of every Empire there's all these gender issues where her mom really?


Yeah, he went into depth about us like Rome and Greece. They always had this thing where like they want to break down all the cart. There is no gender. There's no sex. There's no biology section deconstruct everything well, And they're also the deconstruct all the Norms all the Norms of culture. And one of the more disconcerting ones is deconstructing pedophilia that has been a constant one lately where you're seeing other weird Peto Vibe everywhere. Well, you know that thing that it is gabo cuties is crazy. Okay, that's about talking about the the Gavin Newsom thing. Where did that Pasta Pasta signed it and they said it was a great victory for Lgbtq people what because before it was defined.


This is how this is. This is the the idea. I might be butchering it but I'm gonna do my best before if you had vaginal sex with a girl and impregnated her and say like maybe you were 20 and she was 14. They didn't put you in a Sex Register list because they wanted you to be responsible for taking care of the baby that you created. So this was the idea but if you had anal or oral sex with her then they would put you on the sex offender list weird. Yeah. Well, it's because you're just being a pervert right? You're just mouth fucking some fourteen-year-old as opposed to making a baby that you would then be responsible for weird line.


So, okay, but this is why they they wanted to pass this law in this is why it would for LBGTQ folks whatever gay people whatever is they wanted the said? Well the vaginas not Able to gay folks. Okay, because these guys don't have a vagina. So if you're saying fair that a 20 year old can have sex the 14 year old girl and not be put on the sex registered registry. How come a 20 year old man can have sex with a 14 year old boy and he is also a sex crime. He's committed a sex crime and I'm like this is not fair. So the idea is that it's in the Judgment the judge to decide.


Okay, so I Guess you're giving the judge the ability to decide one way or another so you give them the ability to discern whether or not this was someone who's in an actual relationship with a person who can commit which is very weird right person consent. So but the problem with people have a gave a 10-year Gap so, you know, like a like fly could say 14:24, you could say 10 and 20 like I don't know what it means or where It's where it's defined. Yeah, that's weird. It's crazy, but they're dead. They're only doing it because it already existed in that form right for straight people right now.


So it's not like there's see like we're looking at it like saying. Oh now you're making it legal for 24 year olds to fuck 14 year olds, right? But it's already it's already kind of like that with straight people if they have vaginal sex, right? Wow, that's wild. It's wild I didn't even know that that was not you know, I don't know. That's I thought it was like statutory. I think even but I think if you impregnate I think this is the idea if the person is impregnated the judge has the ability to not put them on the sex offender list. So that that person can get a job, right so you can support your child. Right right because especially in impoverished areas, right, right. That's yeah the whole it seems like it's everywhere the QT thing.


That's what kind of cute he's cute. He's is here's here's something crazy. There was a story in Atlanta where these these guys had rescued 39 kids. Yeah from sex slavery. I didn't hear a fucking word. I don't know but a hundred articles about Ellen being mean. Yeah a hundred. Yeah, and I didn't see more than one. That's a very one day in and out of the news about these 39 kids that were rescued. Yeah. That's another one. That is really I was in a rest stop. It was like a truck stop on the way here and they had the signs, you know, it's like are you being human? Trafficked and they're in rest stops Across America and it's like are you working against your will are you being forced to do so, I was like shouldn't this be and like three other languages which is story not just English about a flight attendant and there was a man on a flight with a young girl and the young girl wrote a letter and left it in the bathroom and the flight attendant got the letter and recognized that something was going she was making eye contact with the kid.


She knew something was wrong and then upon Landing. They had police waiting. Wow. Yeah. Yeah, so it's I mean that's another one where it's real. Yeah. It's a real problem. Yeah, human trafficking and sex trafficking and terrorism terrifying. Yeah and crate and crazy and hideous and odious and all of the worst things in the world and but then you have Cuties which is like, what are you doing? Right? What are they doing? I know I've seen the argument that in the people don't know what the fuck you do. So cute. He's is that it's a movie on Netflix. It's a Foreign film I believe the director is French is she French?


Oh, that's all right. I just don't know that I'm correct about that and it's supposed to be a movie about the ex sexual hyper-sexualization and exploitation of young young girl critics of QT. Say the Nexus film hyper-sexualized has a preteen dance troupe, but director Liu who said Monday that she is fighting. The same fight in quotes, they are to stop the exploitation of young girls. So the way she stops it is by sexualizing them. Well, I guess that are you know what I'm saying her name? So that name my my Mona duke or a quick question.


Yes. Do you remember the movie kids? I do. Yeah. That was a pretty fucked up. Yeah, that's fucked up. I was about kids being wild and it was an Cheryl movie but real kid. Yeah, but he's fucked up that direct. Yeah, that's our got really fucked up a movie called like 13 about to 13 year old girls a couple years ago nearly taken ecstasy and then I'll put the thing about kids is kids was a documentary. No, they're all actors. Those are all actors with am I think of it as a movie? Yeah Beignets and want to in it and like yeah was there one that was a documentary. It was filmed a little bit like a documentary. But hello. Oh, that's right movies first starts with sex right out of them the openings wait here, but it got away. I was I got rent it from the library the library when I was in like seventh grade sixth grade.


Yeah, I was young too. Okay, I fucked up. I thought there was a documentary that guy like it. Yeah, but I got a lot of shit when it came out didn't it? I feel like it was thinking was I think I never saw it and I think it was out pre-internet. I think. Oh definitely Korean or not will be 94 94. Yeah. It was fucked up. It was a five who's the director has done a lot of other Park sketchy shit. It right. Hmm. One of the movies is he done. Come on was the other big thing. That was a weird 195. Yeah. May 20 million bucks Hollow Hmm. Yeah that but I wonder what the I remember I feel like that was pretty controversial.


Remember the movie was it called happy is that it? There was a really fucking weird movie about this kid who finds out that their dad is a pedophile. Oh God. That was yeah or maybe the guy is it's I think it's kind of happiness and that the guy is kind of normalized in the movie and it's like the kid is trying to My friends and I got into this on Twitter about the cuties thing and you know, I I don't know that those girls are old enough to decide to do that film, you know, so it's that thing some of the warnings on it and stuff. Like I don't even want to watch it. It just seems it seems I probably should and just but I don't really want to for other just I just whatever it just seems but my you know, I don't think it's The Sara Lee like Netflix has problem.


It seems more like a societal problem that we have but wait a minute. It's Netflix is problem to have it on there. Now. They have it on their network, but it's the it's like this writer Jane coast and said that's like the thing adjacent. She was like has anyone been to a dance recital because I was talking about like have you ever been to dance recitals? Like we had to do some fucked up shit when we were young kids like dress up and do the in the black and do the my bad. To love and like leotards and red lipstick and I was little doing these dances and JonBenet. That's it. That's a whole fucking weird world Joey Diaz and I were in Dallas once and we were staying at this hotel.


We were doing the Addison Improv. We're staying at this hotel where they had one of those things going on in the hotel. So there was a child beauty pageant is there tell weird it was fucking bizarre. There's one thing to see it on TV, but to see five year olds in pumps with full makeup. Yeah. Alone out here. Remember this from Bad Grandpa with the giant Knoxville movie a couple years ago. They like yeah, they picked up his grandson and made it was fake, but they were also pranking people. So like it's not really fake right little girl and they went and did this whole thing at the and she starts doing that crazy dance and freaking everybody out. Yeah. This is boy. If I remember I mean that's right. This stuff is in our culture already. That's and I think that's more cuties aside and whatever dot that kind of shit with little kid.


In those baby beauty pageants like that. Whoever greenlit that who's like, yeah, it looks good short skirt. Stick your ass out. Nice. Yeah heels. Yeah, go here. It is said yesterday. So that's that's my I guess my point is not necessarily my feelings about qtr. Just from what I've seen I'm like no, but I also think that this is in our culture and we need to examine that that this like the beauty pageants and the right, you know, and it's funny because Cuz of you like oh q and on is crazy and not everything is about pedophilia and then he's too cute. He's you know preview and you're like, oh maybe there are tunnels under what what is it?


My friend said she's like my brother said there are tunnels. There are tunnels under the Getty or some shit for human trafficking. I don't think that's true. But but there was a fuck Island. Yeah, that was real. In fact that prominent politicians well, When 26 times now A lot of times. Wow, you do a really great impression. There's another fuck Island North Fox Island. Oh, I was never there Michigan in the 70s. Oh really? Well, there was a darker way darker story. Oh God, I hate dark. How can it get darker than FC and I had to like videotaped and that's what I mean. That's what I would have you seen the documentary with Epstein killed himself Case Closed far as I'm concerned.


Wow. You really do a great joke Lenin prize one. I was watching the documentary on a nice play, you know, the fact that realization I had watching that documentary is that I would have been one of Epstein's girl, right? I was a fucked-up seventeen-year-old doing drugs was this a Jimmy Jeffrey Epstein was accused of sex trafficking young girls on his mysterious Private Island over 40 years ago a different millionaire Escape Justice in a stunningly similar case. I you know, I had a conversation with Eric Weinstein about this and he had a very I think accurate perception of it. He said I believe there are people who help curate experiences for high-profile.


People can't get these on their own because it's too dangerous and then someone comes along and normalizes it lets you know, it's okay. I got you and everything's fine. This is how we do it and that this person and Epstein's case turns out to be intelligence. You know, that was the That was the accusation that was the prosecutor that had to release them. He was told what's them Kosta was told it was above his pay grade and that this man was a talents and so he had to let him go because he was a part of the intelligence community. So someone told him to let this guy go what? Yeah, and so when he got arrested the first time he got like a ridiculous sentence where he's allowed to go back to his house, right?


And we had to be in jail during the day. Oh, yeah be good be in jail at night and then had to be his house during the Because he was working number this up to a gig stumble. I just came out two years ago. That's right. Sacha Baron Cohen says he turned over disturbing who is America footage to the FBI Cohen says, he showed nearly help the FBI expose a pedophile ring in Las Vegas doing what you're talking about. Yeah, providing experience. Someone was saying look we can we can help you we can get this is what's terrifying what's terrifying is that if if there can be an island that is literally curated and run by an intelligence agent whose ringing in prominent celebrities and politicians and even scientists from all over the world to this place where they're having sex with underage girls.


We all know about it and then the guy gets killed and then now you just hung himself. Oh we hung himself. Yeah, and then you get a Michael bad and who's a famous autopsy doctor says no these these injuries are inconsistent with hanging and they're very consistent with someone being strangled in the position that he's choked on. It's not where someone has ligature. If they say yeah all the things that point to the fact that was murdered and months later like anyway, whatever. Hey 24 hour news Donald Trump's a bad person. We need to get rid of my favs Movin and meanwhile going she doesn't go to she doesn't even go to trial until October. Yeah.


Yeah, they even arrested worst. Yeah. Where is that lady? This is the story that we don't know. It's so it's so weird how it just I'll get it was a house in New Hampshire and waiting magically disappears by yourself. Chopping wood. Just waiting like we doing like they arrested her in a house in New Hampshire. She bought a house again the woods thought you could just be out there didn't even change your hairstyle. Oh, wow. How about when she was on she they took pictures of her at in and out reading a book about CIA agents who have been killed. Oh my God. Remember that you ever seen that she had a photo shoot? Oh my God In and Out in La yeah. There was a photo shoot where she was still on the loose.


Who's after Jeffrey Epstein was killed when she was like sending messages to people. So here she is like clearly posing and the book powerful and out commercial. By the way. I think he's hungry. Yeah, it was supposed so you can see the book and the book was about CIA agents who have been killed. Where was the deserve you can see like they like the book spine. Yeah, one of the pictures there's many pictures as yeah. They did a lot of sleuthing to figure out. There's terrible photo shopping done on the photo. Wow, is there yeah, it's like that. So this photo was taken at a time that like there's this this good boys movie was a Seth Rogen.


We right she was there that would have been like this week and I looked in that company so they never actually had that poster there, but that looks like it was actually there. So wow, like confusion around why this even happen. Wow, so where is what is that in the lower right hand corner? Is that showing what the book is where those arrows are pointing that's wrong with that. Someone went to that finding out. Oh, that's where she That where's the book? I'm trying to find it. Okay. So messed up I soaked red. I mean I was I had to stop watching the documentary because it's so it's as dark as it gets. How about when Trump when they asked Trump about it is like I wish her. Well, I wish her good luck is very unfortunate.


What are you talking about? Are you saying you you wish the the lady who's accused of sex trafficking underage girls you wish her luck and wishing. Well, all these guys are all of them that like level of being is so gross. I feel like everyone in that fucking circle is disgusting when I think back then you could be disgusting and there wasn't any consequences for mmm, you know when you when you think of What it must have been like to be a politician like in the Kennedy days, right? I just open Lane no cars on the road. It does anything. Yeah tells you stop now you do whatever you want.


Yeah your dick sucked in the in the pool. Yeah, you could do that while people are watching. Yeah. No one cared. Yeah now it's crazy. Okay, grass would not talk about his Affairs that they all knew. Yeah. It was like a how amazing. Yeah. What a strange shifting of attitudes and how did that ever exists in the first place? If you're the press and literally your whole job is to tell stories and you've got this crazy story that you keep it under wraps. I see it all the time though. I see it all the time. What's up with the Kennedy thing wasn't even a good cover. Remember when Marilyn Monroe sang at his birthday party. Yeah, but every time someone gets me to dude everyone's like we knew about and whatever and I I don't know if it's just Industries protect their own or if they're like everyone in the industries.


Like I kind of knew that was coming. You know, you'll hear like these stories of I just feel like it might be like politicians they protect each other. I feel like in every industry whenever somebody gets outed. There's there's some sense of like, uh, maybe maybe maybe well when the Kennedy thing was was happening what's really fascinating Meaning is if you apply that same logic and thought to his assassination. No wonder why there's so many conspiracy theories. Yeah, because if the intelligence Community really decided to whack him and you don't think they could have got away with it. Yes fucking people left and right document away with that documented.


Uh, that's document. That's the problem. I have that's a him a lot of people back then. Yeah MLK there was a whole thing written about him the other day. Yeah, but this this idea that they could have never gotten away with this. Murder because people would have talked like no people didn't talk about anything out of that. Of course, they could have got away with his murder and especially if the you think they're going to kill you and then if you go and look at how many people who are witnesses who did wind up dying and really suspicious ways. It's fucking Bonkers. Yeah. There were there for the Kennedy assassination that wound up dying. It's nuts. Yeah. It's nuts how many of them like committed suicide parked their car in front of a train like all that kind of shit.


Yeah, I think that there's a world was dark back there was dark. I think it's always been dark. Yeah, but I mean I think like this whole sex trafficking thing this seedy underbelly of the world thing I think back then it was way worse and I think I was like no way of exposing it. Well, yeah, they all just got whacked. I think yeah. I think it was like a normal pie was probably like when you think of things like skull and bones and all these weird little clubs and A secret society. Remember when Kennedy did you ever hear that Kennedy's speech about secret societies. No. Oh my God. He talked about our secret societies are repugnant. This is before it was murdered.


You know, Kennedy was like against like the CIA and the NSA and all this and he made this public speech about secret societies was this a the president and the Press address for the American newspaper. You can play that we're having a play it because it's really powerful to hear his voice. And to know that this God yes. Well, listen, there's a lot of reasons to think that he was probably killed by the intelligence Community. Well, that's us already up. You can go watch episode 1400 with Tony Hinchcliffe. Yeah. I had a golden pony. It's a disease. It's a bizarre hear it listen to it though.


It's very bizarre. It's a very bizarre statement because why I think about make it today well gentlemen. The very word secrecy is repugnant in a free and open society and we are as a people inherently and historically opposed to secret societies to secret Oaths and to secret proceedings. We decided long ago that the dangers of excessive and unwarranted concealment of pertinent facts far outweighed the dangers which are cited to justify it. Even today there is little value in opposing the threat of a closed Society by imitating its arbitrary restrictions even today there is little value in insuring the survival of our nation if our Traditions do not survive with it.


Wow, and there is very grave danger that an announced need for increased Security will be seized upon by those anxious to expand its meaning wow to the very It's official censorship and concealment dude. There's China - he's trying to warn us about exactly what's happening Great ACT Patriot Act Two. Okay. I know I was starting high in Russia. I don't wanna see what really was. Yeah. He really why we didn't listen don't kill them and I did listen we listen to me that we know now to shut your fucking mouth. Okay, we're both gonna be dead in 24 hours away with more shit back then just like everybody else. Yeah. I mean, it's a it's a weird time because some some of the stuff, you know, I have Very conflicting feelings about some of the stuff that comes out.


I think it's good that a lot of lights being shined on it. I also hate that people don't get due process. So there's like a very strange we live in a very strange time for this. We're great more stuff is being revealed. Although we seem to forget the stuff that's actually proven like Epstein and five minutes and then there's stuff that's not you know, it people are being destroyed and have no No access to due process or anything and even and there's no way to defend themselves coming thing about the obscene thing is that the mainstream media is Let It Go, yeah completely you would think that and they barely even really covered it. It wasn't even something that I to it's almost like they covered it.


Like there was an honorary mention. Yeah, but they had to they had to mention otherwise they would be complicit. Yeah. Yeah. It's a weird that seems like it should be a way bigger deal and be much more covered and It and thank God for those amazing reporters down in Florida who did all that investigative journalism the woman I can't remember her name, but she she's really responsible for like staying on that beat and I just I I think this is why I feel even in La during the riots like the local journalism was amazing. They were doing great work. They were on the ground. They were interviewing people in real time and part of the reason I see so I hate all the division and all of the it's like that The death of local journalism which is contributed to so much of just nobody really knows anything.


Well, that's I've been real forgiving a people writing clickbait articles. Yeah, and one of the reason why I tell people like journalists are fighting for their life right now. Yeah, they're very important to me. It's very important to me that there's people that are willing to get the word out. Yeah willing to explain what's happening and some of them are forced to write some bullshit articles with clickbait titles because they have to stay alive because no one is buying Newspaper know and it's not generally it's usually a calling. I think my true journalists. They're usually called to do it. They can't let go of a story. They want to find my biggest again. This is another weird issue place where we're in his I call it journalism and it's activism masking is journalism.


And I and that is where I feel like the the Press is this is where they're losing their credibility because they're not Being honest why there's no one. Well, there are some but there's very few who are unbiased. Well just telling me they're mostly working in local journalism at Rags that are being cancelled by doubt bought up by bigger things. And and so you have the people who are kind of activists and their journalists or practicing journalism, and that's damaging to all journalists because now you're undermining what your job is to do which is presented. Facts, yes and present evidence and present and Chase down leads and not have your own opinion about things have, you know, discover something as more evidence as presented to you and always be checking yourself.


Well why hope is that through this independent sources will emerge like you're seeing that with some independent political sources like you seeing like whether it's the Jimmy Dore show or Kyle kolinsky or Rising on the hill all these well that are not beholden to any one party. Yeah, they're talking about politics. I'm hoping we're going to see that with everything. Yeah, and that these these people with these buyers perceptions and you know journalism as you call it, which is a great word that they're they're going to because of their own faults open the door for independent people that are not connected with yes. They do have a calling but that recognize that there's a real your hindered if you're connected to some machine. I think this is why people are so confused right now and lost and I hear this from these I'm getting two letters from the politically homeless and they're set what happens a lot is they'll get red told by the mainstream media.


They recognize kind of I think Mouse talks a lot about this and just recognizing the idea of the canal. Yeah, he's great am a brilliant and just the idea of the cathedral as in his idea and I can't remember who he always attributed to and realizing there's a narrative and there's an agenda that's being pushed and once they open their eyes and see that they'll it it's there's not much of a stop on the way to and now why isn't Biden fighting against pedal would you know, there's like, oh, you're just like you suddenly you're like mainlining you've gone from taking a red felt like snorting them lining it and now you're queuing on because I'll hear these people who are start out.


Very reasonable like, oh the last got crazy. I got a little disillusion. I started going down the rabbit hole and then there's really not much because it appeared. Don't know what to believe all of the confusion. Oh, you can protest you can't protest you can wear masks. You can't wear mess. There's no credibility every system and this is generally in societies. When you see this kind of breakdown of society is when people lose faith in the people who are governing them the experts, you know, you have epidemiologist who are like racism is the real the real virus. Like that's not the way viruses work, you know when you're when you're saying these things These two as a scientist.


How are you expecting people to take you seriously when they stop their fucking lives for you. Did you see what the the un's quote was about the pandemic that it revealed that the patriarchy is a gigantic problem. Yeah, and thank you. Then you blaming it on the patriarchy and you have all of these these institutions that are falling in line with the so people are they're stumbling in the wilderness and then their online and then the virtual signaling and then they're there in these Echo. Numbers and then they're going to war with anybody disagrees and then they're they're demanding compliance, but it's easy for it to people the thing that concerns me as if you are a person, you know, I have to check in with myself when I'm like if I feel like I'm saying fuck you.


I'm voting for Trump like that is that is being radicalized. You know, I that is a process of radicalization happening. I understand it. It's something that I have a lot of people doing it, but it's completely emotional if you're like this. Some for some people it's not some people think that well. Yes more dangerous than anything is woke politics. Yeah. Yeah. That's Tim pool. Yeah pools like the media is lying to us that they're they're gaslighting us and I think that this whole woke bullshit is more dangerous than anything and he's gone like full Maga. Wow, but see that that is something that I would check in with myself about because if you were here and now you're here, I understand and I think this is why we live in one of the most interesting times in American history ever because there's so much migration literal migration you sitting here is a perfect example of that and political migration ideological migration.


My inbox is evidence of this people from the center going left to right people from the right coming left people from the left coming right it's fast. I mean, it's absurd that he's for yes hundreds of years if we have a future totally right you two, Only right it's just a fascinating time in our in our history. And I think that people we have to give each other space to re re line a little bit. But what is worrisome to me is in the absence of any one to trust so journalism journalism, any journalists have abdicated their role many politicians are with are all just shit. Basically sending a populist message to the people like I don't understand the worst of but all that in the absence of all of this where do people turn, you know, they're turning to people like you for instance because you're willing to have conversations with many different kinds of people across across the Spectrum so they can maybe you know in order to read the news now.


I'll see a clue. I'll see a headline if it confirms my bias on like I better double-check that you know, yeah, I immediately I'm like, okay double check that just because you're smart, but This is how everyone should consume the news, but I understand why they don't because it's like okay and then I read a quote. Well, that was now I have to go listen to the whole. Okay, that was completely taken out of context. Now, they're citing a study. Now. I have to go read the fucking study. I have a end up with all the skoda all the source material. Yeah, you have to just go to the source material always but that takes it'll take me an hour to read one article and figure out like what's actually true in that article. Yeah. No one has that time. It's easier to be like I hate this exactly.


Bad, yeah, that's that's what most people do they find something that confirms their bias and then they read only those things that exist in their little Echo chamber, but you should be seeking things that you know, push against your bias. I was having a conversation with a person or a person with friend of mine personal friend of mine who happens before know how the unhappy a nose and a horror movie. She's asking me about UFOs and I said my main problem with UFOs that are I want to believe yeah, I mean pop my main problem with all this evidence like it seems real it seems real sees it but the problem is I want to believe right and whenever I want something to be real go probably double check that yeah, you have to mine fuck yourself.


Yeah. That's the right way to that's how you can avoid making an ass out of yourself online and sharing something that's not real like pretty much video. I will not share it. I see so much video getting shared by people who are independent journalists. That is Cut weird it's edited weird. It's not true you end up and there, you know people everybody on the internet. I always make fun of the sun dumpster fire. I'm like everyone's I hate this new season of Law and Order where there's a murder every day in real time. And then the internet is like a sleuth figuring it out there like breaking it down frame by frame. See this is like, thanks guys, like the police on the ground. I am detectives probably have this handled.


Thank you for your well, sometimes though. They do find people like that guy before he did the interview with Vice and exposed that he's the one who killed the Maga supporter. Yeah, they found him they found him because of a tattoo on his neck made identify them people just randos that were like looking at online slow then yeah, actually they actually now that I believe that there's some use in that but it just seems like there's also probably more misinformation that gets spread that way then actual facts. Yeah, and it's that old quote like the live spreads faster than the Truth, you know ten around the world before the truth gets out of bed or whatever the lie a lie will go around the world before the truth gets out of bed.


That's true. And in this kind of environment and then everybody's else, you know that Russian troll farms and Chinese role for us lagging in at 9 a.m. Oh my God, it's Madness. I love it. And I don't know where it where it ends. There's no map of the territory at this point, but it starts with us. That's what I'm saying. It starts with the individual it starts with people. Recognizing that they're biased right learning to consume news in a more intelligent way that's reasonable checking fact-checking thing and it starts even before that with improving yourself. Yeah getting control over who you are like think of what you've done overcoming hypochondria, kicking drugs and alcohol all the craziness that you've gotten through.


Yeah. That's what's LED you to be this critical thinker that you are today and the strong person. The problem is were asking people to be strong when they're not we're asking people Who are there right now who they are is not capable of doing these things. We're asking them to do why because of all the experiences. They've had in their life. That's no excuse. No. No, it's it is not an excuse but it is a fact like who they are is they're so accustomed to behaving and thinking in a certain way that takes a radical shift to rethink this and they can they can do that. They can act in that way and rethink the way they live their life, but they have to be severely motivated right to change. Change is so hard well, and then there's so much, you know, so say you are so radically shift your ideology online and I've experienced this just not in shifting my ideology just not censoring then you get swept up with all the likes from you get it's reinforced with dopamine of like oh if I say this thing this thing does well, yeah, and that's again asking a lot for people to work against you you have to actively be like, okay.


Now what am I not saying again? Because I'm worried. I might piss off my new audience who's embraced me. You know, I would ask anybody who's gone from the left to fully to the right. Like what are you not saying now about things that you're noticing on your new team that you joined weird thing when people do completely as a grown adult shift their ideology, I'm always like oh did you oh did you or were you always wishy-washy where you're always full of shit, you know and to be rigid. One way or the other. It's just so strange. Yeah, it's so strange. Yeah, I guess I can attribute my shift to paying attention and being thrown into the culture war and I don't even feel like my actual values have changed so much as the culture has changed around me.


Yeah, most of what I believe about Free Speech, you know rights the right to have jobs and work how you want to which I push back all against all the time in California what they're There and well, they had a you know, they are the fight that gig society that maybe if I told you about it last night here they had a fight with it about stand-up comics. They were going to try to include stand-up comedy at The Comedy Store actually was at the head of that. Yeah. Yeah, they actually fought and won and got comics reclassified but there was an issue where certain people were not going to get booked because these Arenas yeah these venues rather. We're going to have to employ them. Yeah, like we can't afford to give you health insurance and do a fucking stupid one-woman show here.


There's trying to Passion National version of this called the proact and this is trying to do this the Democrats. There are already passed the house. That's so crazy there and it's a essentially would categorize independent Contracting and it would put give it the same label that it has in California another 85 who write articles for a bunch of different Publications. You'd have to be an employee of each one has joined the union. That's what they want. It's like you're either going to have to join a union you're either gonna have to work for the government or join a union or go get employed but people were gigs, but you know, most people are adults they can understand the cost-benefit analysis that they're making they can say, I might not have great health insurance, but I have the freedom to work as an Uber driver when I want to I can log in when I want to I can clock out I can take an hour break.


I can do whatever the fuck I want on my time and I Understood when I was waitressing that I could have gone and got worked in a corporation. I could have probably gone and got a job anywhere and had good benefits and I would have had to clock in at a certain time and clock out and probably play the game and not say things that I want to say and I understood that I would have to take a riskier path and I took responsibility for that. Now, I think that some of these companies do need to be held accountable in terms of how they treat their workers how much they pay their how much they pay the workers and it is True. I don't I'm not here to defend Uber because they do. I mean even just talk to any Uber drivers they you know, lowered their rates and it's harder for them to make money and it's all so they're not exactly perfect but you can't take agency away from people who are choosing to work as a gig person and not maybe join a union or go work at a job.


And this is why I can't you know, this is something that people should be calling Biden out on because he's come out many times. In support of this. Do you know how gross it would be of comedians had a union disgusting. Could you imagine? Oh fuck with would be in control of that Union and how many shitty Comics? Yeah, but it go to the head of that Union Yes, they don't have any power or agency in their comedy career. Yeah, they were good huge HR department the worst comics with the shittiest ideas of what constitutes comedy. Yeah, and they would probably start censoring people. Yeah it all of it is we we should be able to work where we want and how we want that specially someone like you I right girls for a bunch of different like all of a sudden you'd have to be in a union and pay dues while people so one of the women that I'm friends with head to leave LA because in many single this and it always hurts the people they say they're trying to help she was a single mom and she had you can't work.


You couldn't write more than like 30 articles month. Most people who are freelance are writing 30 articles a week if they can, you know, they're cranking these things out. are and if you are a company for instance you now have to employ that person and so companies based in DC if you're writing for a political whatever it might be they were saying we can't work with you because you we would have to fall under the laws of a B5 and either hire you or that's it and we're not going to hire you is the perfect example of where you can be fiscally conservative and socially liberal right and you don't have to to agree with you don't have to like uniformly agree with everything that's on your side.


And this is this is one of those. This is a conservative Viewpoint that I completely agree with give people Freedom. Yeah, especially in with what we do whether it's a comic or writer. Yeah do both but that kind of shit is crazy. The idea that you would have to be you like forcing people to join unions is insane. Yeah and there if you really I encourage people to read the proact bill and to try and figure it out. Again, go to the source material. Don't just listen to me. Go research this stuff. There's some stuff that I think most people are like, okay that's a little reasonable. But the problem with these bills is that they try and cram in as much crap as they possibly can and so you there's it would make it so that you could there's it's just it's very Pro Union and I again don't have anything against unions, but they shouldn't have all of the Power.


You know, it shouldn't you shouldn't be forced to join a union in order to I work as a comedian or a freelance writer and it hurt so many people I heard sign language people who do translations and hurt people who work as Independent Drivers Pro, you know personal assistants like the it was an endless. There's a whole website devoted to stories from people from hundreds of different. Why do they pass it? Because the woman who did is an insane person. I mean this I think it's part of the reason that elon's Going to bounce out of there too, because I don't know that he uses you. I'm not sure but I'm not sure that he uses Union people in his factories.


I could be wrong about that. But I know that part of her beef was with Elon and Uber and these big corporations, but when you look at who's funding her which I love doing is following the money of all these people it's like all the labor unions. So she's in the pockets of these people and she she will post something and then people will be interventions like please don't do this. You're hurting us. You're hurting us. You're hurting your constituents. Her name is Lorena Gonzalez, you're hurting and she'll just take her her the ability for anybody to reply to her. I'm like what kind of fucking representative are you that you are saying? I'm helping people. Your people are like you're hurting us and she's like mutes all replies.


Like you actually don't care about your people. You're just posturing and saying that you do and in fact, you're just in the pocket of unions and Using a bill that most everyone in the state. I mean Uber and Lyft are going to leave California not like leave take their headquarters like no Uber or Lyft in California because they couldn't comply with the whole freaking business model of uber is independent contractors and left. That's the business. That is the business model. That was the whole plan. That's the whole thing the deal and you're trying to say no, you need to employ these people. What is it? California look like in 10 years.


Is it gonna be Mad Max? It feels like Mad Max already a little I mean does a little special no iron? Yeah, it's just it's so it's so it's heartbreaking what's happening to some of the city's it just I believe that there will be a Resurgence. I think whenever the city's empty out artist Movin and Weirdos and they're like woohoo opportunity. So I believe in the creative especially in New York. It's like people are like New York is that I guess it's not bad, you know the well, hope the right I hope so too, but people still live there in the 70s, even though his violent. It's like jelly has more problems in New York does well as just one earthquake away from being a dead man's land.


Yeah. I know. I don't want to be there for that because when the earthquake hits you think there's a mass Exodus now. Yeah. Yeah, the mass Exodus now is about Freedom. Yeah, that's most of it is about freedom and then the worry about taxes because they're talking about raising taxes. They didn't I think that fell that Didn't pass I could be wrong, but I'm pretty sure that that even that was too crazy for galliformes that it was that the wealth tax. They were thinking about the wealth tax and then oh, I don't know the wealth tax is something they were going to say that died. Yeah, that was the most ridiculous proposal of all time by the talk about that today though. Is it the same tax the California Town? It said like if you make over $400,000 a year nuther, she's me like under nothing will change tax the wealth or tax the wealthy, so I'll over 400.


Well the thing about the California 1 Peter Schiff. What about it? It's so it was so crazy that 10 years ago. If you'd left 10 years ago, you'd owe money. And then yeah for if you leave now from ten years on they could get money from yeah, that's so if you leave today you owe money for 10 more years. It's so ridiculous. How do you even enforce that? And it's criminals are criminals stealing stealing. Yeah. It's Shameless feeling, you know, the idea Tim Kennedy was on the here it is if you make under $400,000 is Joe Biden, you will not by the way. He didn't write this you will not pay a penny more in taxes. Is when I'm president the super wealthy and big Corporation will finally pay their fair share and will invest the money in Working Families. We're going to reward work not well Nia not know.


Here's the thing that drives me crazy where the biggest wealth dust. I believe it's California that has the most wealth and equality in America. They have done nothing to help the middle class. They've eaten the middle class completely all my friends who are my in my age or a little younger in their 30s. They all had to leave and go buy a house and they Years ago because they're like it's too expensive for us to try and get ahead and have kids and these Mom and Pops that are getting destroyed nobody. They don't give a shit about the middle class or the working class. And so every you're seeing tons of homeless people are unhoused and tons of people who are absolutely loaded. I can't wear how am I gonna you know how much money it would take for me to buy a house and I lay for a down payment in my neighborhood 1,300 1,300 square feet.


$50,000 like a quarter of a million looking at me, like that's not that much money. You're like, what's the problem? It's a lot of fucking money. Yeah, it's not get it. There's no - but I'm not detach. There's no still understand that. There's no pass away upward for the middle class in places. Like we are going to get really big though. It's almost there unmanageable when they get really big and they're always when they're really big are always. Run by democrats. Yeah, the really big cities are always Democrat run for whatever strange reason. I mean Detroit's a good example of what happened. You know that that was a thriving City.


Yeah, but that was different because then that was when they shifted the yeah, that was yeah and there's no truck was one of the richest cities in the world. Yeah. Yeah. Fuck that up globalization. Yeah. I mean that was one of Michael Moore's best movies was about Flint. Yeah, I know about however sighs let Michigan Was it called was this first movie the big movie that put them on the map Michael Moore. Was it that climates Roger Roger Roger and me Roger mate. Yeah, it was all about the guy who was the head of GM's that what it was where he was trying to contact him to figure out why you're moving jobs out of the city. And do you understand what you're doing to this place? And that was when he was a real populist.


Yeah, you know and it's funny how he became a villain when you have this movie criticizing the industry of climate change. The industry behind climate change the numbers like you piece of shit, but I thought I was one of you guys everyone's canceled. Its when we were driving around in our tour guide our little Sherpa who is showing us around he he was like showing us all these amazing little old awesome places that are closed because of covid and will probably never open and they've been there since like 1938 and all that and you know, we were saying like if I was a philanthropic billionaire, I would buy all these little mom-and-pop. Ops and help keep them alive because they're the lifeblood of these cities and they're also just that that's what kills me is like I hate seeing this this coffee shop that's been there since forever closed and there's a Starbucks next door and like they're fine, but it just kills that that is where I want sin is all about these little small independent places.


Yeah restaurants independent businesses. That's one of the things that are really love about it. Yeah, that's one of the things that attracted me to this place in the first Suppose I'm hoping that new ones will rise and take their place. That's that's the hope is that the ethic of this community? We need a more robust middle class, you know, if I that's what we need to cultivate in California if you want to try and fix California, that's where you start and how do you help people who are living in the 102 six hundred thousand dollar a year range or even less 60,000 because you can't what is their pathway of especially now? Yeah. How do you help how? Do you help them? Because that's where that's where that's what what holds the center as it wants to run for president.


Maybe we should both run no, no, no, no. No, I'll give you a combo Harris would be the first woman president if Joe Biden will attend, but they gonna make it. Yeah with the Timberlands. All right, we did three. We say oh really? Wow. It's already for right bass for as sorry. It was awesome. I enjoy it as a fine wine the move here. I'm definitely considering it. I don't like to be a follower, you know followers. I don't follow her. It feels so lame know why because I got here first. No, no just because I'm generally everybody's leaving and I'm generally and I want out.


I just don't know where I want to go better. He will go to Idaho. That's right good, but they don't get mad if you talking about shoutout to Boise. All right dumpster fire. It's available on YouTube Watkins. Welcome as my podcast. This is a different vibe than dumpster fire a little more nuanced and your Instagram. You don't use and Twitter at Bridget feta see we use Twitter a lot. I love Twitter and Twitter loves you. Thank you for your love. You too. I love you. Thank you for being here. I do it always bye everybody. Thank you friends for tuning into the show and thank you to our Answers, thank you to phone soap for limited time go to phone soap.com and use the code Rogan to save 20% off and free shipping.


It kills 99.99% of all the Terrible Things in the bacteria and Funk on your phone, which is a hundred times more bacteria than 99% So think about that phone soap offers a lifetime warranty on their bulbs go to phone soap.com and remember use the code Rogan to save 20% off and free shipping that's phone soap.com use the code Rogan and get that hook up. We're also brought to you by athletic greens. If you are interested in up in your daily Health routine use something that's easy to maintain as a daily habit. I can't recommend athletic greens enough whether you're here in the US Canada Europe or the UK jump on over to athletic greens.com / Rogan and claim the special offer today and get their vitamin D3 K to liquid drop off.


Free with your first purchase that's up to a year supply of immune-boosting vitamin D combined with their Daily Greens. It's some serious nutritional Insurance go to athletic greens.com Rogan to claim this special offer today. We're also brought to you by Trager grills. My absolute favorite way to cook I cook on one four to five nights a week and they have an amazing application with 1500 plus recipes and you can control your grill from anywhere with your phone. I love it and you will too. At Trager grills.com Joe and use the code Rogan at checkout for free shipping. We're also brought to you by whoop. My absolute all-time favorite Fitness tracker.


It provides an amazing amount of insight. It gives me actionable data that I can use to improve my habits and for listeners this podcast. Whoop is offering you 15% off with the code Rogan at checkout go to whoop. That's wh oop.com and enter the code Rogan at checkout save 15% get to know. Yourself on a deeper level unlock yourself or poop are my friends. Thank you very much to the show much. Love to you all. Bye. Bye and a big kiss.