
Oh, hello friends, welcome to the show. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by the motherfucking cash app. You probably already know the cash app is the easiest way to send money between your friends and family without having to hold on to that Antiquated paper cash, but the cash app is also the very best way to buy Bitcoin with the cash app. You can automatically purchase Bitcoin daily weekly or even bi-weekly known in the industry as stacking SATs. That is short for Satoshi. Who's the legendary person that created bitcoin. Nobody knows who it is Bitcoin is a transformational digital currency that acts as a decentralized peer-to-peer payment Network powered by its users with no Central Authority, which is an awesome idea for currency and probably a great idea to run the world start with Bitcoin and do it through the cash app.


And when you download the cash app enter the referral code Joe Rogan all One word you will receive ten dollars and the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend. Justin friends fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pygmies in the Congo. So do not forget use the promo code Joe Rogan when you download the cash app from the app store or the Google Play store today. We're also brought to you by Squarespace the host of my website Joe Rogan.com and the place where my website was created and the place where you can create a website. Side, you don't have to know much. You just have to know normal stuff to do with a computer. Like can you move files around on the desktop?


You can well congratulations. You have all the skills required to make a beautiful website with Squarespace a professional website. In fact with Squarespace Squarespace has a simple easy to use drag-and-drop user interface and gorgeous designer templates that allow anyone even a moron like Moi to create a amazing website. Site, they have powerful e-commerce functionality that lets you sell anything online. Each website comes with a free online store. You can customize the look The feel the settings the products and more with just a few clicks. Everything is optimized for mobile right out of the box. They've got built-in search engine optimization free and secure hosting nothing to patch or upgrade ever in 24/7 award-winning customer support.


Seriously. They've got it down it is the easiest simplest. And most amazing way to create a website and I'll let you try it for free goto squarespace.com Joe for a free trial and then when you're ready to launch your beautiful new website use the offer code Joe to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. We're also brought to you by Simply Save Simply Safe has got everything you need to protect your home and none of the drawbacks of traditional home. Security. So here's the thing about home security companies most of the Trap you with high prices, tricky contracts and shitty customer support.


Well, there's a lot of options out there but there's only one no-brainer and that is Simply Safe simply say it has got an arsenal of sensors and cameras to blanket every room window and door tailored specifically for your home. There's professional monitoring that keeps watched day and night ready to send police fire or medical professionals if there's an emergency You can set it up yourself in under an hour just peel and stick the sensors exactly where you need them. No technician required and there's no contract. No pushy sales guys. No hidden fees. No fine print and all this starts at just 15 bucks a month. So it's affordable and it's awesome. And I'm not the only one that thinks it's awesome US News and World Report named simply saved the best overall home security of 2020.


So head to Simply saves SSI. Hi MPL, is a fe Simply Save.com Rogan and get a free HD camera for listeners of this podcast that Simply Save.com Rogan go there and make sure they know that we sent you and last but not least. We are brought to you by Casper. Oh, you've all heard of Casper the Sleep company with outrageously comfortable products at not so outrageous prices from award-winning. Addresses two pillows sheets duvets Casper transforms the way that you sleep once news at a time.


Every Casper mattress is designed with a system to react and adapt to your body all night long inside precisely 1501 perforations create a cooling system. So effective you won't even be awake to notice and only Casper mattresses are made with 86 supportive gel pods to align your spine and Nate aches and pains and together all together. It's the cooling supportive comfort that you need for the most refreshed feeling come the morning from bedding bed frames and even a dog bed Casper has everything that you need to build the bed of your dreams and now with 0% APR financing options.


It's even easier to try a Casper mattress. They're awesome and you can get a sweet deal go to Casper.com and use the code Rogan for Bucks off your mattress order that's Casper.com and use the code Rogan for a hundred bucks off your mattress order. Terms and conditions apply see Casper.com terms. My guest today is a British documentary filmmaker and journalist and the author of a new book sex robots and vegan meat. I really enjoyed talking to her. I hope you enjoy it as much as I did, please welcome Jenny klieman The Joe Rogan Experience Train by day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day Hello, Jenny.


Hello Joe. Thanks for doing this. I appreciate it. I'm totally psyched to be here. Thank you so much for having me on my pleasure. So your book sex robots and vegan meat. Did you have alternative titles that you really really shit titles? I just can't it's a good title. I don't have everyone - yeah works. Well, it's my editor. Chris is titled something like did you have ideas? I had really bad ones. I think when I wrote The Proposal it was called future humans or something and he just said no. No. No, I can't do hi. I can't do titles. I wrote things that are very very long. I can't do a nice little short thing. So anyway, my my editor and my editor at the Publishing House picador came up with the title, and I loved it.


Yeah, he nailed it. Excellent job Chris. Yeah way to go. He's a smart guy. Well, it just it really covers the subject matter so well, and so Succinctly so I'm concerned with all the things you appear to be concerned with. So I'm really excited about this conversation. Yeah, let's let's start with sex robots. This is the first part. I I'm sure you've seen ex machina. Yes. I have fantastic movie right brilliant. Yes tightly and confusing because I think there will be a time whether it's in our grandchildren's life.


For when we're that's a real concern where we do have artificial humans that don't have any empathy. They're programmed whatever way we decide to program them and they're insanely similar to us. Yes, and people are going to have sex with them. Yes. It's this idea that I mean, there are people who are working on this stuff now that's what my book is about is about like I went and met the people who are doing this stuff. Now we have this idea that comes from science fiction of like, Ex machina all press from Blade Runner of these like totally perfect beings who are really dangerous and that doesn't exist at the moment but it is going to exist it is going to exist at some point.


There will be something extremely realistic that gives a very good illusion of Being Human even though it's not and there are lots of reasons to be concerned about this and there are some really solid kind of feminist reasons to be concerned about this because the vast majority of the robots being made at the moment are The female form but for me, the thing that I was worried about is what happens in a future where it's possible to have a relationship where only one half of the partnership matters where you don't have to have empathy. So your other hard you don't have to care about what their Ambitions are what their desires are. They'll always laugh at your jokes. They never get areas, you know, that's meet their family.


And what is that going to do to us as human beings when we don't we when empathy is no longer a requirement of the relationship Kenny. Way you're wearing. Your microphone is rubbing against yeah Rose because you're trying to look cooler as I move about too much. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, perfect. Excellent. Yeah, that is a real concern and I've thought about this a lot because I'm very concerned with this tooth two ways of looking at it one way of looking at it like we at one point in time, they were single-celled organisms and then millions and millions of years later you have Human beings why would we assume that this is the end it's clearly not there will be better iterations.


And I have a feeling that one of the ways we're going to bring that about is through technology and my real fear is that there will be no more biological life. My real fear is that we will slowly integrate will be symbiotic with some sort of technological creation and then eventually will realizable all the things that are holding us back are there. Biologically based whether it's sex or gender or emotions or all these different things that seem to cause conflicts and then if we figure out a way to convince this, you know future version of human beings just give in to the Matrix. That's our future.


You know, what I would have kind of agreed with you on that take about a year ago, except for what's happened over the past year, which is just smacked Us in the face reminding us that biology always wins and that we're much more. Likely to be wiped out by some biological thing that we have no control over whatsoever. Because ultimately that take that kind of reading of the future depends on this idea that we will be able to control things really well that there will be nothing that kind of comes out of left field that can can destroy us. I'm sorry, but wouldn't that be a great argument that biology is the issue because if we did have something that we could put our Consciousness in that is Doesn't have problems with viruses wouldn't that be like an excellent solution to the problem that we're in this is we have a problem with our immune systems because we're essentially symbiotic organisms already, right?


We have all these bacteria and all these different life forms that live within us and you know, the if the balance is off or your immune system is bad then a virus gets in there. You're basically being attacked by another life force. Well, yes, but I'd say that's the difference between A perfect world and a real world and I think it would be almost impossible for us to be able to develop technological solutions that were perfect. They didn't have glitches in them where you could upload yourself faithfully and exist in this sort of Realm Of Consciousness where you were separate from your body there would be problems with that and you'll be relying on this technology to embody you in many ways.


And I just basically think that technology can't be consoles everything technology can do fantastic things, but it can't Of the most important human problems have to be solved by changing human behavior rather than relying on technology. Maybe maybe I see what you're saying, but most technology, although it's not totally reliable is more reliable than human beings like your phone works and is it's much more consistent than most humans occasional your phone will screw up if you drop it a lot but so will people if you drop them on their heads, they'll screw up as As well, but you're relying you're giving the person who creates that technology a lot of your trust and your giving them a lot of power.


And so essentially that phone is only as good as the person who made it and as much as they're fulfilling their pledge to give you what they say. They giving you and actually your disempowering yourself. If you're relying on a piece of technology that's created by a corporation to do something that you could do yourself basically and so that's what my book is about kind of like what I've been looking at is these fundamental particles? It's of human nature and how we're like relying on technology to solve problems for us because it's a bit of a shortcut to say. Okay. I'm going to get a machine to do that. I'm going to get a machine to be my girlfriend or machine to do any of these other things. But in fact, there's lots of unintended consequences of doing that and in fact, you kind of you you take away some of your agency if you're relying on a machine Well, you certainly do my general concern is that we will be just we won't be necessary.


I think this this idea of human beings and agency and all those things are wonderful if we decide to stay human, but when I'm concerned with is when you know, I talked to Elon Musk and he was telling me about neurolink and neurolink is going to radically increase the bandwidth between human beings and information when you start stuffing wires into people's brains and you make some sort of weird Bluetooth connection to an app or some other piece of technology that allows you to interface with it and have access to Information at a much more rapid Pace that seems the beginning of the end of what we call the biological human. I'm really worried about this.


I'm not I'm not worried in a sense but I see the writing on the wall and I see people as having a short lifespan in terms of like this this version of human being that we're enjoying right now. I don't I don't think this is going to last well, it's certainly not going to last because something's going to come and wipe us out but whether or not it's whether or not we're superseded by technology depends on a whole lot of things. It depends on everybody having this technology all over the world and it depends on this technology working properly and I think there will always be people who people who can't get their hands on it who will be living in a different way and maybe a better way and while we all get wiped out because we're all connecting to Bluetooth and telepathically, you know, being inside each other's Consciousness is consciousness has and Getting messed up because of it.


They'll be people who can't afford this technology will be just quietly forging ahead. I mean, I guess this is the whole thing. It's like the difference between you never know where technology is going to take you until you put it in practice. Like even the iPhone like when Steve Jobs invented the iPhone. He's projections his kind of most ambitious Hope was that it would take 1% of the market in the first year like he had no idea we would all become completely addicted to these things and that we can't put them down. And and this is the thing. Nobody knows where it's all going to go. Oh, it might wipe us out but you know, they'll always be people who don't have it who survived that apocalypse. Yeah. Well, there are some people in remote parts of the world that don't have phones now, but that's what's fascinating. If you go back to like the movie Wall Street when Michael Douglas is on the beach and he has that big brick phone and he's a baller.


He's a big player. He's got this crazy phone. He doesn't even have to have a wire there. I remember that that was the biggest deal that this guy was so cool and so rich that he could have a phone and talk to people that are nowhere near him. With no wires and that was unusual. Now you could go to remote parts of the world and you'll see folks with cell phones very poor people in third world countries. They all have cell phones. I feel like that is probably going to be what's happening with all future Tech and that's the rich people have it ever originally initially and then it'll trickle down to other folks as well. But the real worry like when we're talking about haves and It's now like that's a big issue today is income inequality.


Well, when you have people that have can afford neural link or whatever the next version of that is or future iterations. If it really is that effective it makes you that much more productive you're going to have a massive Advantage, you know, assuming it works over people that are just naturally using their biological brains and the Gap will be even wider. Then they'll be real revolt. Yeah, and also with things like for example, like artificial wounds if you can if you can be pregnant without anyone where you can have a baby without anyone being pregnant, then there will be a great inequality between women who can kind of carry on working and not have to deal with all of the stuff happening to their bodies and you know companies might pay for your you to grow your baby in a lab or in a bag instead of inside your body and you can carry on working and then there's a future where like being visibly pregnant might be a sign of having a Unplanned pregnancy or low status or being like a pretty bad mother because you hadn't really thought about it like this technology has the has the ability to create enormous not just like advantage and disadvantage but also reinforcing cast problems in a really huge weight because we will end up looking down on people who don't have the ability to like participate in this new in this new world where there are opportunities provided by this technology.


Yeah. That's the now we're getting really into The weirdness right? Because we're really talking about money more than we're talking about the development development of a human being because you know, you're a mother strange things happen. When you have a baby inside of you you have a connection with the baby the baby has a very bizarre connection with you and the outside world through you and your feelings and senses and to pawn all that off on some fucking robot just seems really weird. I hope that never happens that that freaks me out it it's kind of already happening now though because well Is already happening that now in one respect in that they're doing experiments with animals whether doing it but it's already happening. Now with surgery is I mean all of the arguments that you make now about, you know, the connection that Bond and all of that you could apply to to surrogates as well.


And surrogacy is a very very, you know, difficult area effort lie to get into but it's the only way a lot of people have of having babies at the moment. Yes, and that also was an issue with income inequality comes into play as well. Yeah people that Really don't want to do it and they do it because it's the only way they can earn a large sum of money. So they carry other people's babies inside of them weird mean weird stuff. Yeah your rent it. You are renting out your body. Even if you're doing it for the most noble reasons to give to give the greatest joy to a couple you are basically saying okay, you can have this part of my body for nine months. Yeah, like what we were talking about earlier like I'm with you.


I love human beings. I love I love all our weirdness. I love our flaws. I love the conflict in the resolution of that conflict. I think we're amazing. I think it's a I love talking to people. That's why I started a podcast in the first place. My concern is that we're going to be Obsolete and I really think that if technology continues the way it's currently going this exponential rate of improvement and with artificial intelligence and all the various things that people are working on including artificial limbs that are going to be superior and they're talking about replacing eyes within our lifetime. They're going to be superior to the eyes that we currently use all these things lead me down if I sit and think for long, but well, where's it going?


Well, it's going to artificial people. It's going to something that's Superior to us. Just like we're Superior at least on paper to single-celled organisms. Well, yes, and there's that the transhumanist argument that we're going to be able commenting ourselves and transcending our bodies, but that depends on two things one is this idea that human human bodies are kind of flawed and need to be rejected and improved. But the other thing is that all of this stuff depends on whether or not we want to buy it, you know, the stuff is out there we can say no, we don't want that. We'd rather be inferior and flawed human beings because that's better than being perfect and rendering ourselves. Obsolete. We don't have to go.


On that road just because these things exist. It doesn't mean that we have to buy them. We have to use them. Yeah. No, that's absolutely true. You're absolutely right, but I think people are going to do it and I think more people going to do it than not and then my people I believe in human beings. I think that there's going to be there's going to be a kind of backlash and a revolution against all of this stuff and people will say actually there are certain areas where I want to be flawed and imperfect but maybe those people will become second-class citizens and be be, you know, completely inadequate in this new economy. Of enhanced Humanity. You're depressing me. Now the part you can get depressed thinking about this but you know, I look back on chimps and or are ancient hominid ancestors and I said well if you talk to them and say hey, let me show you your future your future is filled with iPads and electric cars and you can fly in a metal tube that gets you across the entire continent five and a half hours.


What do you think? They'd be like fuck that? I'm sticking with the trees man is where it's at. It's As and eating bugs this is this is life. What you guys are doing is nonsense everyone's depressed and you don't even have to worry about being eaten by a big cat. No, you're doing it wrong. I mean actually, I mean, yeah it is the idea of whether or not life is better. Now that we have the capacity to do all of these things is really up for discussion. Sure. What is better, right? What's better is are you enjoying more? Do you feel more fulfilled and happy and arguably more people are Pressed and more people feel disconnected because of Technology than ever if you've read, you know Jonathan hate if you read his book The coddling of the American mind.


I haven't seen an excellent book in particular when it discusses children and growing up with technology and social media in particular how difficult it is in and for girls especially for whatever reason they experience more bullying and more more depression. And there's more cutting more suicides and there's a giant uptick that coincides directly with the Advent of social media and cell phones. It's really weird because there's this thing that we're adding into our life that causes all these complications and is incredibly addictive. I have a 12 year old daughter and it's hard to get her to put her phone down.


Like hey put that down. She has a time she can only use it for an hour and then it just won't let her use it anymore. But but during that hour. It's like like a feast, you know, it's crazy. It's weird to see and it's disturbing and part of it is I think I see her enjoying it. I see her doing Tick-Tock and laughing with her friends and taking pictures of weird filters, but part of me thinks this is a little demon that works its way into your life and it makes you unsatisfied and unhappy a lot for a lot of people the weird comparison aspect particular when you're an adolescent. It's very dangerous for kids. That's Is I mean that is the kind of key to being unhappy is comparing yourself with other people.


I mean the key to happiness is to not compare yourself to other people and just be happy with your lot. But you know, it's not just teenagers. I'm completely addicted to my phone. I remember one time. I put my phone in to be repaired the screen was cracked and I was just I felt like I'd lost the limb. I was constantly the girl is my phone and then having to remind myself that you know, it was in for repairs. They are incredibly addictive things and you know have a very incredibly powerful effect on your brain, you know, all of that stuff that's proven. About the dopamine hit you get when you get a notification. We're all proud to that. Not just not just teenagers. But yeah the comparison stuff and also there's the fact I think we're now living in a world where we the problems that we have are not huge existential problems.


We're not constantly living with death around us all the time. Although Maybe This Year things are slightly different but you know in a world where we're not constantly under threat. We are kind of our kind of sphere of what should concern us as got smaller and where It would kind of cannibalizing ourselves and looking for probably creating problems. Whereas in the past. We would have been too busy, you know running away from tigers or wherever whatever you might think. Yeah, for sure and there's other issues. Also where people are comparing themselves with things that aren't real like filters and all this weird stuff. I posted a picture on my Instagram that my ten-year-old took of me. We were at dinner and I made an ugly face and she put me through this filter and turn me into a beautiful girl.


It's really bizarre. And I posted it up on my Instagram said this is me like a want you to know how crazy this is. I showed the original picture and then I showed the picture that my daughter created like this is how insane these filters have gotten they gave me hair it gave me beautiful lips and smooth skin and it's and and people were stunned because there's a lot of people I didn't know that it existed until my daughter did it to me like till she showed me. I mean, I knew that it was pretty similar that you could do some weird. Stuff with filters but I didn't I had no idea you could turn an ugly man into a beautiful girl like it's really weird. So there's a lot of girls people are having like surgery so that they can look like filters as well unless they used to seeing themselves in this way.


And I don't know if you have this so much in the us, but we certainly have here this fashion for incredibly big lips and young girls having loads and loads of stuff put in their lips. And so they begin to look more and more like, you know cartoons because And that's the kind of perfection that they're used to seeing in these images. Yeah, we do have that unfortunately, it's a weird one. I think people got so used to boobs being ridiculously big that they thought that well we'll just do that with lips to but but yeah and buts the but one is very strange, but but it's all weird, but it just it changes the geometry of your face and it makes people weird like they get audited out by you they see you with the lips and like well that those Don't go with that face.


Like why are those lips on that face? Like people who have thick lips? It looks generally of their naturally of thick lips. You know, this is the Fibonacci sequence with your face. It works. You see it like, oh that's your face that those beautiful lips belong on your face, but when someone has like thin skin and like angular narrow features in these crazy fucked-up lips, it's your your body like you gasp like you tighten up when you see like, Oh, what have you done? Like? What have you done to your face? I think when people in the future look back on us, like when we look back on it and no two or three centuries ago where people will those tiny courses and think oh my God, I can't believe that was in fashion.


I think people in the future will either look back on us and and just laugh that we did this to our lips or they will all have lips like that and look back and you and me and think it would be nice if those regular working people. I'm worried about genetic engineering as much as I'm worried about artificial intelligence and Symbiotic relationships with technology. I'm really worried about things like crisper and how they're going to affect the the future what the future shape of human beings is I think that if we really get to a point where we can edit genetics and every woman looks like Wonder Woman and every man looks like Thor we're and we're going to be in a really weird place that and I also because you know so much of this stuff is like being developed for really Noble reasons like we're going to stop people from Being sick.


We're going to be stop people from having diseases and it's hard to argue against that and also that the kind of the the limits on people using this stuff are kind of voluntary things that countries sign out to I mean China gets a bad rap for using the stuff that at least they Chinese scientists do sign up to lots of ethical codes. There's nothing to stop scientists in North Korea or in Russia or countries like that that don't care about these ethical codes from from doing whatever they like with this technology. And that's the point is that we need To be able to have these discussions before this technology is out there and be able to be critical about technologies that might be able to do incredible amounts of good so that we're ready for them.


Basically, right that is part of the issues like the people that create the technology. It's like they get to a point where they're they're editing genes and they're doing it for these good reasons, but then that technology exists. It's sort of like when Oppenheimer created the bomb Like what would he was doing? They were trying to do it first because they knew that Germany was working on it and they knew that this was something that was very important to be first with and but then once he detonated it and he realized what he had done, you know that famous quote from the bhagavad-gita that he said, you know, like as the bomb blew off.


He said now I am become death destroyer of worlds, like it. It really dawned on him. Like what have I done and I think That's probably going to happen with genetic engineering when they when they're doing it initially and they're trying to help people with leukemia and all sorts of diseases. But then you see everyone looks like the Hulk, you know, and then your you live a thousand years and then we have massive overpopulation problems because nobody dies and people have Bulletproof Skin. This is not outside of the realm of possibility. This is all in the Wheelhouse of genetic engineering if they just keep doing what they're doing right now. Now and you extrapolate you go forward a hundred years things can get really bizarre.


The point is that nobody can control where their inventions will eventually go and who will control them and what they'll be used for and like, you know, one of the things I've looked at is meat grown in Laboratories so that if you get if you could eat meat without killing animals by cloning the cells of a live animal and the people doing that stuff there vegans and their animals. Activist you were like the animal rights argument. We haven't won that argument. People are still eating me, even though they know it's really cool. So we're going to give them what they want. But do it in a way that doesn't involve killing animals and we're going to try and make it cheaper and better for you and that is a noble intention in many ways.


But then you know, they can't say that in 20 30 years time. They're not going to be bought out by some giant meat company that doesn't care at all about animals or people or anything else and you know, nobody can control how technology is going to be used and who is going to be using it and what for that's the thing but we that we do have is this is this is where I'm kind of more optimistic than you that we as human beings have had the power to say that we don't want this and that we aren't going to go for this and there are enough of us that we can you know, they can be a critical mass of people who say we're not going to allow this to happen for it not to happen. I would say I love your optimism, but I feel the same way about you saying that as I do when the green party is running for president here in America.


Like we don't need the Republicans. We don't need the Democrats. We're going to start a third party and I'm like good luck. Most most people are crazy. Most people are going to jump right on board and get fake eyes. They're gonna do it. They it's they're going to want to be able to read minds like come on Elon Musk drilling my brain to stuff those wires into my make the little bit it's not going to suddenly come out there and be there on the market as we said like the Most people who are going to get it are going to be very rich people who have it and then there will be a backlash of other people saying hey, it's not fair. The rich people can read my mind. Maybe nobody should be able to read anybody's mind. It's not going to all of a sudden happen. It's not going to be like a science fiction movie. That's the thing. No, I don't think it's going to happen quickly.


But I think it's I think it's going to be one of those things that we just accept just like we accept cell phones, you know, we if you had a cell phone 50 years ago people would think you were a warlock now all of a sudden, it's normal. It's Normal part of our life and I am worried that that is going to be the same with whatever whether it's neural link or whatever future inventions that we have that enhance brain activity and and I will adore it's already happening with things like IVF, you know, like when IVF first came in like total science fiction so much backlash. These were Franken babies and now it's just like so normal. It's it's advertised on the tube here. Yeah and people talk about it. It casual conversations know we had our kids through IVF.


Oh cool. Okay, it's normal. Yeah. Yeah, the the sex robot thing. I share the same concerns that you have about the there's a thing that people do when we get to know each other. We want each other to like each other and as we grow up with, you know, as boys grow up with girls, they learn how what girls like and girls learn what boys like and we learn to be better people because we want other people to like us it's part of the whole process of the development of a human being If all of a sudden you can have sex with this perfect woman that you could spit on and pee on and do everything that she's always gonna be there for you.


We mean as it's a gross image, I'm sorry, but this is the real worried that there's no consequence to any of your actions and you could do whatever you want. It's it's like there's a video game mode called God mode. I don't know if you play video games, but it's the most boring thing in the world because when you play on God mode you can't die. So all the consequences of playing the video game have been removed. Like when you play a video game you have a certain amount of life. You have a finite lifespan, you know, if you're playing a shooter game, you have a finite amount of bullets and you gotta run around and find more bullets that's part of the fun of the game is that you could it could end you could lose but when there's no consequence and I feel like there's got to be the same thing in dating, right?


If you're not nice to be able they don't call you back. They don't like you and then you go. Wow. Wow. Have I done wrong and then you learn and you grow if there's no learning and growing you need feedback. Yeah. Yes, and you need to not this is the things about having a domestic Echo chamber to have something in your house. That is always laughing at your jokes and always like the same music as you and the same movies as you and lets you program it to disagree with you. But then again all that matters is what you want, right? I think that's going to be very damaging and corrosive and particularly because the people who are making this stuff at the moment justify it by saying we are making this for people who otherwise Wouldn't have a relationship bereaved people socially awkward people people who are disabled.


We're giving them a chance to have some sort of companionship which they wouldn't be able to have otherwise, but what these people need is they need some human contact, you know, they will be further isolated by having this kind of perfect illusion of a partner because that's just not reality. The whole point about human beings is they're unpredictable and they disagree with you and and they have in-laws and menstrual cycles and And Ambitions and stuff and you know, it's incredibly important, you know to grow as an individual to not always get everything you want. Yeah, I'm totally with you on that. Yeah, it's like that scene in ex machina where you realize that the the genius has this bizarre sexual relationship with these robots that he's created and particularly the the Asian robot where you can kind of tell her what to do and you like oh, wait a minute is that that's not a person but why do I feel like it's a person?


Like I feel like he's a fucking creep but it's not a person he's doing this too. Wow, so it's sort of highlights these strange dilemmas, like you're gonna create a nation of sociopaths with oddly perfect female companions. Yes and almost kind of worse than that is I interviewed these these sex robot manufacturers in China who make very very realistic sex dolls that they're putting a i and animatronics into But really really realistic the AI isn't so great, but they look really realistic and and I asked them, you know, how come you're doing this and they said that actually what this is really ultimately about is about having service robots in the home, but ultimately you can have robots that will cook and and clean for you at the moment, but they look like movable trash cans and they're not appealing and so actually what we're doing is making them look nice.


So you want to have them in your house and if you want to have sex with them, you can and what that description is. Basically of is a slave. Yes. This is what they're making is slaves. They're making things that look human but we'll do all the things that human beings don't necessarily want to do and so my concern is there's a whole branch of Ethics about you know, should we robots have rights and you know, are we should we should they have the should they have legal protections? I'm not so much interested in that. I'm interested in. What does it does it do to you the robot owner. If you have this relationship with a being that looks very very human but isn't human and the mindset of being a slave owner where Are you you can suspend your empathy for something that looks very human.


How does it corrode you and affect you to be having that kind of relationship. I mean, I see a black mirror episode ready to happen, right actually and then I see like someone pretending that they have robots that they really have human slaves. That's a really good idea. Yes, mate seems like that could really happen. I think there's going to be a branch of Ethics that gets developed to deal with artificial life. If we It to the point where we have control over artificial life and that artificial life has been programmed to actually mimic our emotions because if you have something that cowers when you hit it and when you scream at it it too hides in the corner and cries and weeps and you get you get off on that.


You think that's fun. Like what what is that? You're not doing that to like if you have a basketball? Okay, and you like to punch that basketball and scream at it and call it a bitch and throw it in the corner. Everybody's like okay like it's just a basketball like you're fucking weird. I don't know why you're doing that. But you know if that's what makes you feel better fine. You want to scream at your basketball not at a human being that's fine. But what is that basketball looks like a human being talks like a human being has emotions that are programmed into it. Like how realistic does it have to get before we rebelled against this idea. No, totally and part of the part of the question about child sex dolls and child sex robots is in part of all of this that some people say that you should give pedophiles child sex sells and child sex robots, like like it's a kind of methadone, but it will win the most offending but we all know instinctively that that's wrong because it's more likely to feed that desire then to satisfy it.


We all know that but then how is that any different from saying, you know, you can give people who are sex offenders Female dolls and and robots in all or even men who are a bit aggressive or or even you know, whatever it is. It's like if it's wrong to have a child sex doll because you'll relate to it like a child then that same kind of thought process has to carry over when you're talking about adult dogs as well you we will relate to them like they're human. That's the whole point. Yeah. It's a very messy situation like once they're created in once they actually do mimic real human beings. It's going to be very strange and I completely agree with you when it comes to pedophiles pedophiles and a child robot doll.


Like that's that's not going to fix anything and no but we know that that's the interesting things like we have a kind of instinctive reaction. No that's wrong. But then if you think okay, well then why is it okay to have I guess because adults can constantly and kids can't consent. But it we know that with a child or a child robot. It's wrong because you Person owning it are going to be treating them like a human and relating them to like human. It's going to encourage you in the real world to go off and behave in a bad way. So it's the same sort of argument. Yeah even inanimate one. Like if you went over a guy's house and he had a real doll, you know one that doesn't move but you know, he's like, well, I just prefer that to masturbation you like.


Oh, I don't know like masturbation is normal, but that's one step removed like that. That's weird. That thing looks really real. Like other thing about Real Dolls is that they because they don't move. I mean, I obviously I went to the real doll factory because they don't move and speak. There's still like a fetish and it's a very Niche thing you have to be turned on by dolls or you have to have an incredible imagination where you can imagine them coming to life the thing that robots with artificial intelligence and AI is that you don't then they're not so much of a nation of fetish. They are verisimilitude of a human being they are trying to Be it to be a replacement relationship really and with a robot.


It's much more about the relationship than about the sex you can have sex with the doll. The whole point of a robot is that you can have a relationship with it. Yeah. It's the Joaquin Phoenix movie. She yeah that movie is that she her her, huh? Yeah where he's has a love relationship with this voice. Essentially. I mean, that's what we're talking about. We're just talking about in the physical. Or form. I'm I'm worried that this is inevitable. I just it seems inevitable. It seems like if this these companies are already developing ones with wonky AI it's going to be like the difference between that brick that Michael Douglas have on the beach and you know a Galaxy S 20 Ultra, you know, the the newest latest greatest cell phones.


They're just going to get better. It's going to get it is totally inevitable. They'll always be quite expensive. But it is totally inevitable and there's a there's a guy called. Dr. David Levy a British guy who wrote a book in 2007 called love and sex with robots where he predicted by 2050 human-robot marriage has would both be legal and acceptable around the world and I think he thinks is going to happen sooner now, but yeah, I think this technology is inevitable. It doesn't exist so much of the moment cause at the moment, you've got these robots that look very realistic because they're like real dolls and the AI isn't bad, but they Walk Walking is really really expensive to develop and it drains a lot of power.


So they haven't worked out how to do that. That's the kind of next Frontier. So you haven't got this this science fiction fantasy of like a robot that will come and knock on your door and deliver herself and say hello. I'm your new girlfriend or whatever it is. We're quite a way off that but it is going to happen whether or not it'll be cheap enough for everyone to have one is is another matter, but it's definitely going to happen. Do you think the people will propose laws to prevent this? Like once it starts seeming like it's inevitable. Once the general public goes. Hey, wait a minute. Like this is not good and then people realize that their romantic relationships like they're going to be replaced men and women and women to me when we're going to be tired of men's bullshit.


You know, that's probably true. But then I mean I can't speak for all women here, but I think certainly my experience and I don't think this is a minority view is that women find the idea of having sex with But you don't know genuinely wants you to be very unsexy indeed and it's much harder like all of those real dogs. They make male real dolls. They're bought by gay men like women it takes a it's very very difficult. It's not sexy to her to have sex with something that isn't really into you. Basically that kind of the same thing with Playgirl like Playgirl. The idea was well women should have a magazine like Playboy to like, okay, you know, buys it gay men exactly mitr girl.


Is very very it's a very very different thing. But I do think there will be women who want Companions and so forget about the sex there will be women having relationships certainly with with very realistic male robots to definitely but in terms of whether or not they're going to be laws against this there's a campaign against sex robots in the UK. The first was trying to get laws Banning sex robots or the development of sex robots in the UK and now it's kind of soften their stance and says they are they just want proper discussion ahead of maybe making some I was but the point is the cat is out of the bag. We could you know, we could ban it in the UK people will be making them in Korea or in somewhere unless there's a kind of global decision not to do this and there are too many Rogue States for this not to happen.


So it is going to happen and always, you know, the law is really out of step with technology, you know, if you look at things like revenge porn some that we know instinctively is so wrong. It's been really hard to criminalize because of the way that we all live now, everybody's taking pictures everybody selling them all the time people can upload them and ruin someone's Is life in a moment and it you know, the law is kind of grinding on slowly trying to keep up with all of this. And so for example in the UK that what's illegal in terms of sex dolls is if you're not allowed to import a child sex doll, so it's the importation of it that's illegal not having one but trying to get it into the country just because the laws are kind of so old and creaky so I don't think actually it's something that we can stop with laws.


We can stop it by saying actually I don't want this and I'm prepared to accept compromise. My relationships and I'm prepared to accept that in order for me to grow as a person. I need to be challenged and not constantly in a relationship. But all that matters is what I want. Yeah, I mean all those things sound right? I agree with you. It's not that I'm saying no. No. No, you're wrong. It would be better if these sex robots took over my real worry is that it doesn't matter what we think is right that technology always goes. Towards Innovation it always goes towards improvements. It always goes towards technology advancing where it's more effective more available easier better cheaper faster.


This is what we always do. It's what we've done with every single thing we've ever invented and it's got to happen with that as well. But I think the difference between our position is that you think the march of technology is completely inevitable and there's nothing we can do to kind of shape it or stop it. It's just gonna Happen whereas, I think I think none of this is inevitable and I think human beings are capable of adapting and changing without technology and like this year is a really good example of this that we're all waiting for a vaccine vaccine has not arrived. And so we've kind of Saved ourselves by changing our behavior and change your behavior in a kind of altruistic Way by staying at home, even though like we might not get sick with coronavirus or wearing masks for other people's benefit.


I think human beings are really adaptable. Ville and we can adapt by changing our Behavior rather than relying on technology and this March of Technology only exist. If we continue to always think that technology is that is the solution people have to make this stuff and people have to buy this stuff in in order for it to March on and we always have the power to say, you know what I don't want it. I think reasonable people like yourself. Yes that's going to happen. But clearly you've seen videos of spring break in Fort Lauderdale where kids are making out. Half naked on the beach. Nobody gives a fuck about coronavirus and then there's a maps that show the spread of them leaving Florida and going all through the rest of the country and that all these infections and show up there actually, but there's a critical mass of there's enough people that are being reasonable.


But when those things happen, it's really shit and people get ill but it's not the end of the world. That's the point. I think most people are reasonable and are able to behave in a kind of way. Where the good Kind of wins out. I think I agree with you on a lot of these things. However, when I look at human beings I try to look at human beings as if I was from another planet if I was an alien and I looked at them without any connection to the way they think or behave or their culture and I said, well, what do these things do? Well, this is what they do. They make technology. All they do is make technology. They're obsessed with materialism which plays into technology. It plays into this want and need for the bigger better faster greater thing that comes around every year.


That's what fuels them to work every day. They go to work and they toil and one of the things they reward themselves with is the newest greatest thing and this is the fuel for this technological growth and this technological growth appears Unstoppable because it seems like that's all the human animal does if you looked at it from afar objectively. All I'm seeing is a constant wave of Technology. But I didn't think that's true because we don't just make technology. We also talk to each other and we communicate like you and I are now and we have discussions and we are capable of incredible change and that we can live in a world where you know, it was okay to keep slaves and impregnate your wife every year and keep her in the kitchen but through having these discussions we can really really change the way we live very drastically from one generation to the next it's not just technology.


You know, it's also what defines a human being is that we use technology. That was social animals and those are two different things and the idea that the technological advancement is always going to win out isn't necessarily what I buy. I'm not saying it's going to win out. I don't think it's going to win out. I think it's just it's inevitable and I think we're going to fill both inevitable and as a society we can make change just as much as we can make change by using technology. Yeah, that is the vast living balance. Right? I mean most people are today are aware that they're addicted to their cell phones yet. Most people still use their cell phones. We were aware. Are that it's harming us. But yet we still use them because we just go it's just a phone. No big deal.


But you know, it's a big deal everybody. I know it's a big deal. I know I checked my messages too much but yet I still check my messages too much and I'm aware of it and I've read a lot of books about it. But I think if you sold it was harming you enough if you thought it was destroying your brain cells, you wouldn't write the point is it's about it's about how you weigh up harm and you think yeah, you know, I should probably be doing other things or I shouldn't be constantly checking the Twitter. That person I hate but you know bad from my soul, but you still do it because it's bad for your soul but only a little bit if it was really really throat of and bad and then you would stop I mean, yeah the Block B, you're healthy person or maybe you're one of those people who likes to pick scabs and you just you just keep scratching.


That's possible. Yeah. I'm worried for people. I really genuinely am and this is as a person who enjoys people. I just I don't know how much time we have left as in this. form like when I look at the archetypal alien, when you see those little gray men with the big heads, I'm worried that with that is is like we instinctively know that that's our future that we're going to be these genderless weird things reproduce through some sort of, you know, some sort of some sort of Technology instead of these bizarre imperfect biological creatures with emotions that we you and I both enjoy so, Much because of all those all the weirdness.


I mean my whole business everything I do is about the weirdness of people or whether it's stand-up comedy whether it's podcast or even fighting what I do commentary on fighting that's all the weirdness and imperfect nature of the human animal and I think it's awesome. I mean, I love people don't get me wrong. I'm not rooting for technology to do this, but I see the writing on the wall. It's not pretty well. The thing is it's all about the richness of The Human Experience. What makes it interesting to be here. Human, which isn't just the basic functions of our life will or basic logic, you know, the fact that we have art galleries everywhere in music music which is completely completely illogical. Yeah. It's because there's more to Being Human than those basic functions and when you talk about, you know, sexless aliens reproducing without sex like that kind of stuff is going to happen quite soon.


And I know you know, I looked I looked into quite a lot of this that we can make like gametes we can make cells they can do this in mice you can make sperm and eggs out of cheek cells so you could make a Got your cheek cell and sperm it will be a future where people can make sperm and egg whichever one they need for whichever relationship there in and that you can grow baby outside the human body and we will become less and less gendered that is going to happen. Yeah, you know, the end of sex for reproduction is quite possible that we will just have sex with fun and then we'll do babies in this kind of very controlled way, but we're always going to be weird human beings. We're always going to like strange things like dancing around to music all the stuff that can't be explained. and the drive to be weird and the drive to to be a logical is very very powerful and I just think I think we I'm not so deterministic about stuff and when I was when I was like doing all the work for my book, I was quite worried it was going to be really depressing because you know in It In A Book Like Mine like you can't you come to a conclusion where it's like, well there's a future where women might be obsolete where we can be replaced by robots and artificial uterus has and you know, misogynist men can live without us or you know, These things are really dark and worrying but that's that's to buy a particular view of human nature as as being a kind of slave to whatever comes next and we're too kind of weird an idiosyncratic I think to be done away with that easily.


Well, I think the weird and idiosyncratic nature of people something that you and I both enjoy. But I mean, I think if you can replace men with cheek cells, I mean if you really can do that if you really get to the point where you can create sperm From your nose hairs, whatever and you don't need a man anymore with or a woman or a woman? Yeah. We're cool in vitro gametogenesis in vitro gametogenesis. You can make gametes in vitro out of anything and they've done it in mice and they're going to try and do it in human. So it is going to happen, but it means you know gay couples can have babies without anyone donating anything and the good part. That's a good point. The bad part is no more people having sex to make people and then we're going to realize as a society all of our problems are caused by a Oceans if we were just logical so we figured out a way to remove emotions.


And here's the thing the Motions the good part about emotions are dopamine and serotonin, right? We all agree and dopamine serotonin. We can actually reproduce that in your own brain so we can have the same feelings of love and and the same feelings of happiness, but without all the illogical behavior that ruined lives so they'll be no more jealous boyfriend's burn your house down. There'll be no more chaos no more. Murder, no more violence know where any of this everybody needs to sign up or you know, or you're a barbarian or you're some terrible person who doesn't want progress. Yeah motions are holding us back. That's what I'm worried about is it was like a slippery slide into us becoming something something different and more more predictable - just really dark but you're right.


I mean well, I mean it's it's it is critical for us as a family. And yes, it is dark for us as a species. I mean, I think that the the the idea you're right that those emotions they can be artificially induced anyway, and it's the natural emotions for the but all of this is depending on a world where there's a system where everybody has access to all that technology or all those drugs or all those whatever and you know, there will be accidents. There will be babies born. Naturally. There will be you know, yeah and then and then maybe those people will have you know, because they will be naturally so Elected in a different way maybe they will have a completely different take on things that will save us all the thing.


That's really scary about the whole being able to make sperm and eggs from cheek cells is that it means you can make an infinite number of eggs. So at the moment the number of babies a couple can have is limited by the number of eggs a woman can produce and if you can make eggs from cheek cells, then you could have a billion eggs, which means that you could you could, you know, conceived a million fetuses and you could artificially select The best ones you don't need crispr for that in terms of genetic engineering when you can make unlimited numbers of fetuses between a couple and and choose which is the best one and that's not you know, if this thing can happen that you can make eggs, that's not a difficult thing to do and we're not that far away off all of that.


Yeah, there's so many things to worry about I had a conversation with with Ray Kurzweil where he was talking to me about the ability in the future that they will have the ability to download Consciousness into a computer that you'll be able to take your Consciousness and put it into a computer because essentially Consciousness is something that's we're going to be able to replicate it. It's going to be something that we can just recreate with computer programs and software and other and my thought was why Okay. Well, what if someone's crazy would have liked some Kim Jong-un guy decides to make a billion of him. Look if you have this world this artificial world that you're going to live in if you're going to live inside this computer, right?


I'm assuming there's some sort of an environment that's compatible with the the human consciousness. So you're going to create some, you know, real world multiplayer game where people live inside of it. What's to stop someone like Donald Trump for making a billion Donald Trump's right would it was this doctor? You from doing that from populated like a big big philosophical experiment then because the question is, why would it matter if this is all virtual and none of its real this is basically a computer simulation. Why does it matter if in that computer game? There's a billion Donald Trump's and Kim Jong-il right in or why does it matter if you want to piss on your sex robot and punch it like it's not even a person I guess the difference with that is because it's going to change you as a person when you get used to behaving like that.


Whereas this uploaded Consciousness world. No human being is around to see it. You've uploaded your It's doing its own thing in that world. That world is a parallel universe where nothing matters but I think the idea of uploading your Consciousness is very interesting because there's an incredible narcissism in that. Yeah, there's this idea that people will want to know you after you're gone and your Consciousness deserves to be preserved. There isn't enough space in anybody's kind of you know, how could you deal with the world where the consciousness of every human being who's ever lived is is in there? They're just be too much going on. You know what I mean? Oh, yeah. I mean imagine you could remember all of your Your ancestors, you know, how would that affect you if you constantly had the Judgment of your great-great-great great-great-great great-great grandparents to deal with as well as your parents or whatever.


I don't think that would be very good. Not only that like who's to say that once they do upload your Consciousness into some computer that they won't have some infinitely better version of this software and Hardware down the line. Are they going to transfer you again? Are the do you and who's going to do that at some point in time? Who exactly are we going to be able to take your Just listen, continually upgrade it or you can have to sign onto some some gold group. Like well, if you sign up to this path this plan, you know, we upgrade you every two years to the newest latest greatest software and you know, you get a wonderful place in heaven. Like what are we doing?


I know in case to say that we were not going to be doing crisper for people's Consciousness has and editing out will say I will take out your mental illnesses and then eventually will be will take out your your irrationality. You're bad movies and you're antisocial habits and then you know, yeah, yeah point is, you know, nobody Who develops technology can never control where it goes and the problem is we're really uncritical about technology because we're so used to science fiction where technology is either really bad or it's wonderful. There's never this gray area in between where it's sometimes really could be used for real good but has a potentially really dark application if it's used in a society that isn't fair or that has certain ideas about certain individuals and that's the Galaxy in which we live whereas, you know the moment we're stuck between I don't know the Terminator and some some some sunny sunny future.


You know, there's no real Sunny future though. There's no I don't know of any science fiction movie where it looks awesome in the future. It's always describe. It's always like really distraught dystopian. Whoo. Yeah, I can't think of anything. I'm sure there are quite often in science fiction. There's technology that's being used for incredible good. There's just you know, we've solved that problem or you know, yeah, we know we no longer. Yeah, we've got we can we can grow neat without killing animals and that's all fine. And everything's fine in that sorted. It's no longer a debate and even things like, you know, like in Blade Runner.


Yes the robots there. All bad but they're also perfect and Flawless and and don't have any problems with them. Do you know what I mean? Yeah anyway, but yes most science fiction is just dystopian because it's about our inner fears about how we can't really control anything. What's its also seems like one of the things that people enjoy is, we enjoy enduring and recovering and overcoming obstacles and if we get to a point where we've we've removed that where will the joy come from that will be more obstacles will always invent more obstacles. This is the whole thing that when you know, when you live in a country where there is no longer the threat of nuclear war starvation death, they'll be another obstacle with you know, body dysmorphia, whatever will invent something else.


Do you know what I mean? Like, yeah, we all I mean, I think I think that human beings are we are constantly trying to control everything around us and we're constantly in fear of the chaos around us. That's why we use technology to try and give us this illusion of control over the world and there are some things that we really can control and Technologies, but great at doing that, you know, I am very grateful for technological advancements in birth control that mean that I haven't been like perpetually pregnant for the past 20 years as a great thing that I can control that part of my body, but ultimately there are many things that we just can't control and that technology doesn't solve problems.


It circumvents them. It gives us a kind of easy way out of them instead of forcing us to confront the cause of the problem. It's just like Plastering over them. And so yeah, I think a lot of The Human Condition is this struggle between wanting to control everything and having to deal with the fact that ultimately we have no control over anything and also implementing our ideas and that's that's part of the problems that people are constantly trying to come up with new better ways to do things and they won't Implement these new better ways to do things and then we deal with the repercussions in the consequences of these new changes tightly of the way that we've implemented.


Yes. And this the think there's a I got the perfect example of this which is when I was in Las Vegas doing part of the reporting I went and interviewed a man who'd made a sex robot a very bad sex robot in in Las Vegas and then I went back to my hotel and they were playing really really loud music in outside the entrance to the hotel to try and get people to come into the casino. No, and I went up to my room and there was like a dish next to my bed of different kinds of ear plugs of like silicone ear plugs foam earplugs wax earplugs all these solutions to the problem caused by the management there and they could just turn the music off but instead they've given you this profusion of solutions, which hotel.


Yeah. Oh I can't it was in downtown in LA and not in LA in Las Vegas. I can't remember the name the name of it was a while ago. It was this. It wasn't it wasn't even a grimy hotel, but it's this like a good example of this is also like with our phones. We're all addicted to our phones. So we can't sleep properly. So people are taking melatonin so that they feel sleepy but you could just put your phone down, you know. Yeah, so we've become addicted to different orders of magnitude of technology to solve problems caused by technology. Do you ever go camping? I'm not a big temper, but I have been camping. Yes many times. The interesting thing about camping is if you do it for enough days you realize that your brain when it gets dark out you start preparing to go to sleep and instead and normally, you know, like 8 o'clock at 9.


I'm wide awake. I'm wide awake for several hours at 8 p.m. But when I'm camping at 8 o'clock, it's like well just kidding. Right? Let's eat and crash. We know you sit around the campfire talk a little bit and get ready to go to sleep. That's just what I do. It's but that's your natural cycle. We've circumvented that with light. I mean if you look at the you know, the effect of technology on human beings, it doesn't have to be something as fancy as a perfect sex robot lights, like artificial lighting has changed Human Society human brain chemistry. If you look at a hundred and fifty years ago when everybody want, you know went to bed and it's as simple things that we don't have to go to sleep as soon as it gets dark and how much we have changed because of that.


It's incredible. So that's the other thing. Thing is the things that really have a potential for radical change and on human society human behavior and human biology. They don't have to be very fancy and high-tech. You don't have to have Elon musk's you know, Bluetooth brain chip. There's only this one even more Insidious aspect for lights and that's its disconnected us from the universe the one of the things that you realize when you do go camping when there's no lights is oh my God, we're in space like you see all the Ours and it's extraordinary when you go like I went to the Keck Observatory once in Hawaii why I've been a few times but one time I nailed it where I went where there was no moon and the sky was clear and it was stunning and to this day.


I still have close my eyes sometimes and try to remember that remember what it was like because you could see the whole Milky Way you can see every the Keck Observatory is very high on the big island and it's above the clouds and in fact when we were Driving there was cloudy and I was like damn this is going to suck. We're going to get all the way up there. We can't see anything because these clouds but then you pop through the clouds and then you get to the observatory and it is amazing the just without looking through a telescope just the amount of stars that you see it's so stunning. It changes your relationship to yeah to life and to this experience that we're having here on Earth. We're so delusional when we don't see any stars we have Street.


It's and we're looking at our phone. We're watching TV we have this bizarre idea of what life is but then when you're there and there's nothing but the stars in the sky you go. Oh no, this is an organic spaceship. We're hurtling through space on this ball. And I thought this was everything but it's nothing when you see all those Stars it just it's it humbles you in a way that our ancestors were humbled and why they were so obsessed with the constellation. Ins why they're obsessed obsessed with the zodiac signs and all the the different ways that these would study all the lights in the sky and try to figure out what kind of relationship we had with those lights.


We have lost all that weight. We've lost the context and the perspective on our existence that that we need really but then again also would we could we really function if we were constantly aware of how you know infinitesimally small and in my courage? Sure, I guess it would liberate us from being so obsessed with gazing at your own navels. I think you would probably be humbling in a way that would eliminate a lot of unnecessary hubris. I think there's a lot of dumb shit that we do that is connected to this sort of dulled perception of our place in the universe and I think if we could see it and it can humble us the way it humbled the Mayans and all these other civilizations that were constantly fixated on the the celestial guy.


Gods and all the all the different lights in the skies. I think I think would be better for us and I but I think my fear is that all of this is like we're and again this is looking at it outside of a human being all of this is leading us towards this complete total immersion in technology and one of the best ways to get us to not think about our position in this vast infinite universe is that we don't see it. What was the best way to not see it technology blind? You literally blind you to the most spectacular Vision the world's ever known the most spectacular Visions. The heavens is the sky the stars the Milky Way all the galaxies that are visible to the naked eye.


That's that's what gave people so much wonder and and created some of the myths of what's going on up there. Well, if the best way to eliminate that and have us fixated totally on ourselves and become self-centered is to Blind us to it and that's what we've done. We've done that with lights, but I think it's all say all of this is also to do with capitalism and that capitalism depends on us all feeling incomplete and like we need the next big thing in order to be complete. So we need this bit of Technology will solve this problem or I will be fine. I will be happy if I have bought this thing or if I bought into this solution and there's no money to be made saying hey, what you really need to do is get a proper night's sleep go and do some exercise, but you don't need you don't need anything fancy.


Do some exercise eat a little less if you're trying to make lose weight. But all you need to do is eat a little less has no money to be made in that way. So we're kind of we are robbed of our context because capitalism depends on us thinking that we can control everything and be it kind of self-determined beings if we just buy the next thing and always focused on our own project and what we're going to do next to achieve the goal. We want there's no money to be made in telling people everything as it is right now is fine and and good and you should just appreciate it right there. We don't do that. You're absolutely right, but that's what we were talking about earlier. When I was saying that I feel like materialism which was is one of the great plagues of humanity this desire for for shiny things that are supposedly going to make us happy is also fueling technology because in order to keep up with the human desire for these things, we're constantly creating newer and better things.


So all of our ridiculous instincts to acquire these things, Are literally fueling the innovation of Technology. But again, I would say I agree with you. But again, I would say like we have the power to say, you know, I don't need these earplugs. I'm just going to turn the music down or or you know, I don't want this sex robot. I'm just going to deal with you know, we all ultimately we have the power of being consumers and the consumer has the power to not want something and that's where real power lies in in in being control of your desires are not just being led Along by I'm saying you need this you need this, you know having the power to say I don't think that I do need this and I'm fine just as I am I agree with you, but I don't think people are going to say that I think they're going to give right in I don't think anybody's moving to a log cabin in the woods either.


I think you like one out of a million one out of a million and we figured it out. You just need to say, you know, I I've got a house that suits my purposes and it's fine and I'm happy with it and my life is good. I don't you know, I'm not I don't care if people look at what car I've got and judge me on it. Those people aren't worth while I mean, I'm not saying that you give up all your possessions and become a hippie. I quite like having stuff but I reached a point in my life where you know, I've got a job that I love and I have two kids. I have a lovely family and I'm very very aware of feeling like I'm there and I am I have everything I want and I other possessions they might be nice, but actually I feel fulfilled but then when you Feel fulfilled you're aware of how the how much the world is constantly trying to tell us that you'll only be fulfilled when you've got bits and when you've done this, but I would love that.


I would submit that you are a very intelligent introspective person and I think that's rare. I don't think a lot of people feel very fulfilled a lot of people different view of human nature. I think most human beings are really good people who just want to get along and that they're angry with that. I agree with that. But what don't you agree? Well, I agree. Most human beings are really good people that want to get along, but I think they will give in to the siren song of materialism and technology and all these different things because I don't think there is introspective as you are you're looking at it and you like this is perfect. I've got this I don't need anymore. This is fine. I realized all the things that are fucking up my life and fucking up society, and I'm not going to give in to that.


But you're an author you're someone who thinks all the time you literally spend hours every day think we need we need to encourage. Ridge critical thinking there isn't really enough right? There is no percent Moment Like particularly in the way that we communicate now which is about people being angry and then other people being angry and then other people enjoying watching the two sides fight the the skill of being able to think critically and to to enjoy the gray area where both sides are kind of right here. I you know, I think that we're going to move away from this area because it's you know, I don't think we're going to get more and more polarized because there's only so far that we can all go. Without wall killing each other basically. Yeah, we're pretty far polarized pretty far apart and you know and in the UK as well, you know, but eventually I think when we are no longer enjoying being Spectators or participants in this sort of violent debate, you know, we'll be looking we'll be able to look at the gray area and and look at what's available in that and we need to encourage critical thinking and not just Tech not taking sides.


You know, I agree with you a hundred percent and I hope this is where it gets out. On it because I feel like conversations like this are what help people because they it resonates what you're saying resonates with people to hear your words and they go she's right. She's right. I got I'm going to adjust I'm going to just the way I think but it's technology that's got us to this position in the first place. We're more polarized now with more connection than we've ever had before. We have more connection with each other than ever before but the problem is that connection is very crude. It's very clunky. You and through the quality of the connection. Yes. Yeah, it's through texting and this this weird thing we're doing with Twitter and Instagram.


It's like that. We're more connected but we're more connected in a way that it doesn't we don't feel it. And so when you more polarized what really the big difference now is that, you know, a friend of mine said to me is totally right and it's something that I've discovered over the past five 10 years that if you want a superpower what superpower is to listen to really listen to what People are actually saying and not what you want them to say or how you know to really really properly listen because people are just not listening to you anymore. And I have you know, in one respect I write books and I write really long articles and when I do those interviews with people I interview them for a long time. I transcribe it all myself.


I don't use a computer or pay anyone else to do it and it's so dull and hate it but that's where I really understand what people are saying and that's where I get all the ideas for structure and then I have another part of my Work that I do is I present a radio show which is completely the different a different thing where I'm interviewing people for like six or seven minutes and I'm learning. I'm learning the skill of that and part of the skill of when you're doing really short interviews. You're meant to kind of ask questions but force people into saying saying things or trap people in a way and and the performance is you asking the question rather than you listening to the answer and thinking okay. What would be an interesting question to ask next and Is much more common.


I mean, I love my radio show not saying my radio show is like that but I'm saying I'm learning how to deal with a world where that's what's traditionally done is the style of interviewing is a kind of dance that you do with people instead of asking a question where you think the answer might be interesting and then really listening to the answer people don't really do that anymore. And if they did, you know, you can you know, this more than more than anyone else the power of giving people proper time and really really listening and responding because in the world we're living in now people feel like they don't have time for that. 100% And I think everything you're saying is why podcasters so popular today? Yes, please hungry for yes, particularly a podcast like this weathers. There's very few people involved.


It's basically just you and me and my producer Jamie is over here working the controls that's it. And because of that we can explore these ideas in long form and what I've learned over the years is to listen and to to my the whole Cept of having a conversation with purse with a person trying to think the way they think don't try to be right. Don't try to like get them in a gotcha. I don't ever try to do that. I just try to I've tried to figure out what you're thinking and then I'll present you may be something that's contrary or controversial or I just want to see how you react and I want to I want to I want to feel the way your brain works and I want to I want to let you breathe.


I want to give you room. To explore these ideas and thoughts and when people listen they're essentially allowing you to think for them in a way. They're like you're talking and I like oh Jamie's got some really good points like it's working in their brain like, ah, okay, and I don't know that in the short form. Now you done and the popularity of your podcast shows that people really want that they want to be able to really explode ideas and here the different paths that you can take through an idea. Most news journalism is about forcing news lines out of people like getting this politician to say that they fucked up or getting this celebrity to admit that they did whatever or you know managing to skewer someone into saying something you're admitting something and and it's just that it's the opposite of what I do is the opposite of what you do but most people assume that's what the public wants is these new lines a little have you heard this has happened that's happened.


Whereas actually I think people are really Hungry to hear properly, you know nuanced debates where different sides of things are weighed up and people are not kind of sparring. Yeah, they want to hear people explore ideas. That's what they really want to hear and they want to hear people explore ideas. Honestly, whether they're not manipulating people's words and not playing weird games. They're just trying to find out how each other views things. And I hope there's an appetite for that, you know as somebody who generally does, you know, the articles I write I like 5,000 words. They took a long time to write I write books. You know, I hope that that people are always going to see the value of that because doing that kind of stuff takes takes time and it takes thought and energy and it's it's not as disposable as doing this quick interview where you know, you're really clever and you've managed to get someone to say something or admit something that they haven't admitted to anyone else, but that's that's where the real meal.


The really really long stuff where people are actually listening to each other. Have you thought about doing a podcast? I love to do a podcast. I did a I did a like a podcast documentary a kind of True Crime thing where I kind of did a story as a podcast. I did. It was a story about this Dutch fertility doctor who was really successful in the 1980s and and then it transpired recently that the reason why he got such great results as if he was using his own sperm to inseminate all his patients and there are now like 70 Dutch kids who all look like him who are trying to get Justice. I heard it's a great school. Yeah, I heard about this story that since I did that but then I would look I mean a podcast like this where I'm sitting and interviewing people.


I think I was probably I probably enjoy that to you a great at it. You really should do it you'd be fantastic at it. I really think that's I mean you're built for it endorsement. I would love to I would love to do I guess it's all about picking the right people, isn't it? I mean, how do you Choose who comes on your show just has to be interesting. That's all I do. Luckily. There's no one telling me who to have on so I just find people's books interesting or I find the subject matter interesting or you know, I'll watch a video interview with them with someone else like the way they think and I just want to talk to them. That's it. That's the only the only motivation and occasionally some of them are famous, you know, like there's some really interesting famous people and but that's it.


Or maybe an artist that I really enjoy or whatever it is with an author. I really enjoy their work. I just I just like to talk to people that I'm interested in and that's my only that's my compass. Like what have you ever asked to speak to somebody and it's turned out there not that interesting. Yeah about a few of those. I don't need to mention any names. Yeah Grudge. I'm trying to get a newsline out of yeah, I don't want to be mean. Yeah, there's there's there's some that I thought were going. Interesting. It just turned out to be sad, you know just was it was depressing and you know, and I think you know, you're lucky in that you have a reason to have a podcast which is that you're a comedian.


You know, you do your ultimate fighting thing you have you as a brand and for me the problem that I've had as a journalist my whole life is but people always say like what kind of journalist are you and I'm a journalist who like I look at stuff. I find interesting. Whereas most other journalists are like, you know, I'm an environmental journalist or I write about about women's issues or I'm a political specialist and I've only ever I've been a bad I'm like you like I want to do whatever interests me, but I haven't been given the same opportunities to do it because I don't have that other thing which is I'm a comedian so you should come along with me and what I think because you know, yeah, but you're respected broadcaster, like people know who you are. You're an author a published author. I think if you build it, they will come I really do I really think that's do it.


Okay. Well if you say so then I've got to really maybe Let's talk about vegan meat. I want to talk more about that because I've I've always found the vegan substitutes to be very disgusting and weird weird because this is a thing that you don't like right. You don't like the fact that people are eating meat so you I understand you trying to indoctrinate People by look you don't have to eat meat you can have this fake Burger. That's actually terrible for you actually worse for you than real beef, but But filled with all these disgusting processed oils that mimic the taste of beef and some strange way.


So why don't you have that? I I've always found that to be so weird because I feel like I'm you do veganism correctly. It's great to have vegetable dishes that taste good but shouldn't they be fucking vegetables? Like why you tricking yourself? Like what do we like if you're a cannibal and you're like can we all agree cannibalism is bad? Yes, we can Okay. So let's have faith. Babies that you can eat like we would never agree to that right but yet will agree to these fake Burgers. It's like we all know what a burger is. It's ground-up meat. So you have a fake burger. Like why are we doing that? Why can't you just eat vegetables why we have to play these weird gymnastic mental identic game the people who make this stuff.


So this two things there's plant-based meat which is meat substitutes, right clever meat substitutes made not from animals, and then there's the stuff that I look at a lot in In the book, which is meat that is growing from cells that are cloned in a lab or medium brown grown in a lab. So but with both of them, they all come down to it a particular view of human nature, which is that human beings are incapable of change that human beings should be eating less meat because it's bad for our bodies. It's bad for the planet enormous contributor to carbon emissions antibiotic resistance water pollution water wastage land wastage. It's a disaster.


Zoonotic diseases so two seasons, but jump from animals into humans like swine flu bird flu, maybe coronavirus are linked to animal agriculture. So we haven't we have to stop eating so much meat but this particular the people who make this stuff think human beings are not going to change. So we have to give them what they want. We're going to give them what they want. So we have to make it a burger that looks like a burger because the whole premise behind all of this is that the kind of ethical campaign of animal rights has failed, but you can see pictures of animal animals in abattoirs. And yet people still eat meat like they shut their eyes when they open their mouth. They just don't want to see it. They know it's cruel, but they like it because it's tasty and so we've got to give them something that looks the same and tastes the same. It isn't the same and that's how the kind of animal Rights Campaign Will Win not with arguments not with saying you should just like vegetables more and so it's a quite a dim view of human nature, which is you know, we're never going to win people over with arguments.


So we're going to give them something and yet maybe very unhealthy. I mean some of the plant base Meets that's being made now is very convincing and but it's Ultra processed food and also to make those plant proteins taste and feel like animal proteins you have to shift a lot of elements from around the world and put them together. So it might be responsible for a lot of carbon and actually, you know, I think we just need to eat less meat. You know the argument of meat being bad for you. Most of those arguments are epidemiology arguments their meaning you ask people. What do you eat? How often do you eat meat and then you find out who's having heart attacks?


It's not meat being bad for you. It's usually that the people that eat meat are eating a lot of other shit to the usually eating french fries and drinking soda, and these there's a lot of contributing factors to them being There are some things you can pull out like, you know colon cancer is really connected to red meat there are different there are different. You know, when you dream about meat being bad for you. That's a big umbrella. And yes obesity is caused by a lot of different things but over consumption of large quantities of meat is connected to heart disease and how it's connected through these epidemiology studies. It's this the way it's connected. There's no one who's shown a study people who eat grass-fed grass-finished beef.


If and organic vegetables only over a period of X years, what are the results because I guarantee you it's it would be healthy humans. That's what it seems where people don't eat like where people generally immunity. I've seen your logical but when you when you look at societies where traditionally there is not a dairy culture or a beef culture how those societies have changed when when it's become fashionable to have diarrhea nose in those cultures and what Kind of diseases have sprung up because of that. I think I mean I knew I would need to go and look at the evidence base. But I do think there's quite a well established link between overconsumption and I mean over consumption of meat.


So like eating it every day several times a day. I don't think that is I've looked into it. Exactly. Yeah. The real issue is human beings have eaten meat since we are human beings. We have always eaten me this idea that all of a sudden meat is bad for you meat is protein and water. And amino acids it's not bad for you. What's bad for you is first of all processed sugar and nasty carbohydrates and and those fake Burgers all that shit's terrible for you. What's bad for you is hydrogenated vegetable oils and all the sugar wasn't all of it. I would say what's bad for you is the overconsumption of anything.


So yeah human beings have eaten meat since the beginning of time, but you would kill one animal and then live off that one animal for a really really long time. And then maybe go quite a few days without getting when I kill the same way. It's the greediness and the overconsumption of it. That's bad for you. Well be sitting for sure is bad for you. So the overconsumption of anything meaning too many calories more than your body's burning off and you get obese obviously this terrible for you, but most animals are edible. So when human beings were evolving we ate whatever we could get ahold of most plants are inedible and when you're running around trying to figure Figure out what you can eat and what you can eat the animals that survive to the ones that eight other animals.


If you just run around less, you're an animal like a cow the figures out what I'm just going to stick to Grass because grass seems to work out for me. Well what happens when we feed cows things that aren't grass they get really sick me. That's one of the problems with if you ever watch any of those documentaries on on how they raise cattle to make them fat and you see oh it's horrific what happens to their stomachs and their bodies and You see a well-marbled piece of meat that people think is delicious. That's a dying animal that that animals die. That's why it's so fat. That's not normal and this juicy steak that's well-marbled as because you've made that thing sick that poor animals sick and now you're eating a sick animal.


That's what there's two things. I say to that and what one is yes, I mean the problem is industrial agriculture, you know producing a a factory production line of animals because we are all eating meat so much. It is unsustainable. The only way to produce it and produce it cheaply enough is to produce it in that way and you know, it's disgusting. I saw some of these Farms Forever on the outside as part of part of my research for it and it's like it's it's disgusting and awful. You know, there's the the Harris Ranch that's in between LA and San Francisco that the nickname is Cash wits because it's like a giant concentration camp cows.


It's a horrific. They're all just crammed in there. But then I think you also have to be careful talking about it being natural to eat meat on the basis of the fact that as cavemen. That's what we did. It is natural, but that doesn't mean to say that that meat that's a reason why we should continue to and I'm talking to you as someone who is still a carnival. I still eat meat now, even though I wrote this book where I sat out the argument for why eating meat at the levels that we're doing now is completely unsustainable. So I like the way it tastes but the thing is there's a lot of the way that we live now, you know it was Natural for us to be naked and for us to die when we were 30. This is a lot that there's a lot of natural before that. We don't necessarily live with now and the point is I think a lot of people are very defensive about their right to continue eating meat because we really like it.


It's tasty. It's part of our culture in the it's something that we don't want to let go of and that's why people are are going to all these Great Links to lengths to give us these kind of substitutes because it's such a big part of who we are but it's difficult to make an argument. It's right for us to continue eating meat because it's natural because it's good for us because those arguments I think don't necessarily stand up but it is okay to say I want to continue eating meat because I like the taste of it. I think the argument that it's it's right to eat meat is a very tough argument to make when you're talking about factory farming and I agree with you 100% It's disgusting and it shows the worst aspects of human nature that we have conceded.


And that the best way to feed people in mass is to stuff these animals into these disgusting factories in these huge warehouses and have them live in their own shit. Like you've seen pigs and cows and chickens and all these animals are treated this way. I don't think that that is the only way to raise animals. And if you if you talk to people that specialize in regenerative agriculture, they can not only can they not have Massive carbon emission but they can generate carbon neutral Farms. There's a guy named Joel salatin who runs a farm called polyface Farms that he speaks to people all over the world about his particular style of regenerative farming and about letting these animals live like they would naturally only eating grass.


He yes, he sets up these enormous chicken coops and their mobile where these Chicken Coop State he moves. Has them all throughout the farm. So these chickens can go out and free-range and then come back and he loses a tremendous amount of chickens to Natural Predators like Hawks and Eagles and things along those lines. But his his take on things is that it's completely immoral what human beings have done in the name of profit as far as raising animals and that it should have never been done and that though that is the main argument against animal agriculture is factory farming. Yes, but I would say that even though that sounds great.


And it is great. There is not enough land on planet Earth for all the meat that we're currently eating to be produced that way and particular the outsides of tribulation is increasing it is true you would you know, I think we need like five other planets if for everybody to continue eating meat at the level that we're doing that we're using it now the population of the Earth it's going to be you know, 50% again what it is now by 2050 is a fact Unless they factory farm the way they're farming right now. There is no way that we could meet the demands of you know of all of those people eating meat particularly. There's going to be nine billion people on the planet by 2050 with the land but we're here now, so you talking about expansion population, but with the current population that we have right now, is it sustainable to live in a way where they don't have to factory farm.


I think it is. I think it is sustainable. If we eat less meat that's the thing if we don't eat it twice a day 7 days a week if we I eat it twice a week. It just has that I think is a complex issue and I honestly don't think neither you nor I have all the data at our fingertips we could argue this art, but I think we both agree that first of all factory farming is fucking disgusting. It's horrific and it's it mean I think it's one of the worst things that human beings do in terms of not just our impact on the world itself. But also how we feel about What we do there's something if you know that you're eating something that was tortured most of it's life, but you do it anyway just because it's delicious.


How could you respect yourself? Like, how do you feel about yourself? I think it's very bad for us to accept factory farming and in America. We have these ag-gag laws that are even more disturbing where say if you work in a factory farm and you find the conditions to be horrific and you film it and take photographs of it you go to jail. I'll arrest you the locked you up for showing horrific actions that will discussed most of the people that are eating that food which is really crazy. Well, I think I mean most people when they eat food they know kind of theoretically that it is produced generally through a lot of Cruelty, but they just push it out of their mind.


Yeah. You can't thinking about that one it on a daily basis. If we agree that most people are good people. They don't want to feel like they're complicit in the torture of Animals on a daily basis, but that is what's what's going on at the moment really and and even the ones that live a good life. They still have to be killed for us to eat them. No. Well, they don't live forever. If you don't kill them. I don't know if you know that it's not like if you don't kill them they become varies, but we're you know, it is not very nice to be killed. You know that it's not about he do it effectively and humanely its instantaneous and they do that rod. Ah to the brain, it really is instantaneous.


It's a very messy complicated argument though. Right? Is it? Okay for human beings to kill their animals? Yes, you know was in it for me. What's interesting is like I am on an intellectual level. I I by the arguments I totally agree with the argument for not eating meat. I you know wrote I wrote all about all of this and yet and that's why it's I was a kind of interesting person to go and look into this world of okay, so if you could grow meat without Animal dying and you know, I ate a chicken nugget that came from from a chicken called Ian who's still alive. So I ate ate a piece of meat from an animal to still alive. I'm the kind of kicked dream target market of this stuff because how vile was it.


It was really bad in the way that you don't really expect because it tasted like chicken because it was chicken but it's chicken cells that have been grown in a lab and they're in a kind of mass a mushy Mass. So it wasn't like it didn't have you didn't have the texture of meat at all. It didn't have, you know fibers in it wasn't a cut of me and you know when you eat meat But the texture is not quite right or something's not quite right. You have a kind of Primal response where your brain is saying? So yeah, but then I had all these PR people looking around going to taste like chicken doesn't it was like yeah, it tastes like chicken chicken the day.


Yes, sir chicken. He's been mushed up and stepped on and holding to a boil so it's not ready yet. But ultimately these people are thinking they will be able to grow a cut of meat and they'll be able to they will be able to grow a steak. Shuffle steak Yeah, the moment really really difficult to do that. I think in great. I don't think the argument is just a taste argument. I think the argument is a health argument because I think there are some of the neighborhood of the high 80% of people that try veganism and quit and a lot of them. I mean, I've had a bunch of them on my podcast that talk about it Miley Cyrus is one Mike Tyson was another they just give up because they don't feel good and and immediately upon eating meat they start feeling better again.


When some of them become pescetarian, you know, some people don't have problems with fish because they don't have eyelashes and they don't really look like us and it's like if what kill something kill them but is the moral argument against eating fish is even great successes. There's a fishing guide in the oceans with the fish, you know, it's in the way we do it is even yeah horrific. Yeah. It is really erected and we can't Farm fish in the same way. We can't do what the awful things that we're doing on factory farms with animals. We can't Do that with fish because they died most fish don't really like living in those conditions and they just don't they just don't grow properly. But yeah, it's terrible but ya know with the thing about me is it's a very efficient way of getting that nutrition into your body.


You can get that nutrition in other ways. I mean, I'm selling like a vegan here on I am not a vegan, you know, I'm not a vegan at all. No, I know but I know you're right. I have friends that are vegan that do it right and they it can be done. I just Don't think it's optimal. I know I don't believe it's possible haven't worked out how to do it. Yeah. Yes, but it is it is possible and it's not like the only way to get out of adequate nutrition is to have a hamburger or whatever. So and Amber are you know, I think the argument for this this vegan meat the creating meat in a lab is really the future and I think they're going to be able to do it. The question is that they're going to be able to do it as you're saying that where it has the texture Of an animal that's been like animals that taste good are animals that are healthy to me.


Like I like I enjoy grass-fed animals and I enjoy particularly Wild game because wild animals, they live a wildlife. They taste better it State there's more to to it. It's like if there's more substance to it if they can figure out how to do that in a lab that's going to be fascinating. They could figure it out difficult thing to do because the reason why the texture is different is because those animals are Exercise. Yes, you say muscle and you know, you're not going to be exercising those little things in the lab, even if you're growing it. So that is a really it's a really really tricky thing to do. And the other thing is that food is really an intimate experience eating is a very intimate experience and people don't forgive when you know, if you eat something that's disgusting you don't try it again.


And so the issue with this is whether or not the first Products that come onto the market. I'm going to be good and if they're not you could have some giant bubble and then it will be a bubble and they'll be high. Cycles and then people will try and do it again. Eventually people will get there. But you know the sort of thing that I think would satisfy you and make you feel like this is great. We're really really far off. Well, what I was going to get to is those real ethical concerns with creating a headless animal that use electrical muscular stimulation to keep yes active and you develop muscles through that like that's going to freak people out even more but don't worry. It can't be alive it's never been alive. So you created this thing with Like a you know that's bolted into this machine whether you're shocking it constantly in order to keep the muscle strong and then you eat it, but it's never had a head.


It's never going to have a head so it can't really experience pain very interesting because because the whole I hadn't thought about this, but you're quite right. It's like the whole appeal of this stuff is this is me not from animals, but if you have to make it behave a little bit it's like an animal so that it has the right texture. Where does that work in right in terms of the philosophical approach this the ethics of this if it's An animal but it's been moving like an animal is how much is it still the animalized? Yeah, don't you think that's where it's going to go? Like if somebody wants a bone-in rib eye. They're like hmm. Well, there's a way there's a way and they just decide to recreate an artificial cow and clone the whole thing. But Sands head and then, you know, you will actually have a bone-in Ribeye from an animal that you can ethically eat because it never really had a chance to be alive and just be a cow.


Ow, I think we're much more likely to have a 3D printed steak. This isn't very good at first and then they finally work out on a molecular level how to make the strands the fibers exactly like that the the piece of game that you like so much because it's lived in the world. I think that's more likely than a headless cow on a treadmill maybe Bob. The beef scientist comes up with some headless animal. It tastes way better than those who she cloned animals. He's like look, I understand what you're saying. We shouldn't kill animal. Well, this isn't even an animal. This is a headless cow. It's attached to a bunch of wall sockets. We just charge that fucker up every day.


He's got big thick meaty muscles because he's been electrically shocked shocked constantly and to Contracting and relaxing those muscles. I may be one of the arguments for this for this meat grown in Labs is that an animal is quite an inefficient conveyor of calories because animals is as well as growing flesh. They also flap their wings and they pack and they run around as if they burn the calories they take in and so there's the these scientists have done and kind of equations that for every for every one calorie that you eat from beef. It's taken 36 calories for the cows had to ingest 36 calories to produce 1 calorie of beef. So I think the argument that you make the meat and then you get the meat to exercise what kind of undermine that idea of it being more calorie efficient because the meat will be spending calories by moving around what you believe.


Doesn't have a head. Yeah, I was like, how are we going to sustain this thing? I'm sure my this scientist shaking their head at my stupid idea like that is not going to work that way. It's an interesting philosophical principle though because it comes down to the point of what is what is life. What it what does it take to something to be alive? Is it alive if it's moving around but it doesn't have a brain, you know, and that that was something also that I looked at is that we have a very unsophisticated idea of what life is and while we while we do do that. It's quite dangerous that we're tinkering around with it and growing growing things cells when we haven't really sat down and thought about what we really mean when we say that something is alive. It also is interesting that we've sort of conceded that we are connected tin you to overpopulate the planet.


Yes, like listen this it's hopeless. We have 7 billion now have 10 billion in 50 years. Let's just deal with this and just yeah, that's a giant problem good ways that we could tackle overpopulation. Yeah. Really positive things like, you know, if women have an education they have fast the children that's kind of a point that the point of my book really is that this is the most ridiculous overshoot engineering to solve this problem. We could educate women and eat slightly less meat but no we're not going to do that. We're gonna go to a lab where we're going to clone. You know, it's just ridiculous. What does it say about us as human beings that instead of using these solutions that are within our power.


We want to have our cake and eat it and and one thing That technology is going to be able to provide us with that. Yeah, and the thing about the thing about the meat grown in Labs is it does sound like there's no downside but there are you know, nobody really knows if it's better for the environment to to grow meet in this way there haven't been enough studies on it. But let's say even that it is the people who are going to own this technology at the moment. The startups are trying to get investment from Cargill and Tyson and big meat companies that have the infrastructure to distribute need and those The companies I mean, you know what happens in those in their meat packing plants where people you know have amputations all the time.


You know, they don't care about they they're not very ethical company shall we say and so it's very likely that this industry is going to be taken over by people who don't care about animal rights or human rights very much. They just want to make sure that they're in controls for meat market. Yeah. They just going to want profit. It's just yeah, it's gonna is that corporate about yeah. Yeah. It's it's it's a human. It's like many human problems. It's messy and complicated and nuanced there's a lot to it and what if it's bad for you, like what if this lab-grown meat turns out to be particularly problematic with our digestive thing that they can they can make it they can make it good for you. They can take out whatever is bad for you.


They're saying that they can be they can make kosher bacon because it doesn't come from a pig and they can make foie gras or without without all the ethical problems of force-feeding that this is the perfect meat because they can engineer it down. Every last cell but again, we don't know what the unintended consequences of any of this stuff is and we only find out through experience which is the frightening thing. Yeah. I'm curious. I mean, I wonder if we could do that with fish. I mean if they had that growing fish are they fake fish real fish from Fish cells as a company called finless Foods. It is the Pioneer in all of that and and they're growing fish at the moment the same way the growing beef like this. Yeah. Have you tried that?


No because As the people I interviewed there they weren't kind of they were much less full of hype and they're like no no. No, it's not ready. What we've got yet isn't ready. But the thing about fish is it harder because with with meat you can make burgers and sausages where it doesn't really or nuggets where you don't really need cuts of meat Weir's with fish. You really do need cuts of meat and especially because we're so used to eating Sashimi. We know what raw fish is supposed to taste like so you can't use the smoke and mirrors of cooking it in this butter and adding these hubs or whatever so fishes. Of harder in some ways but the need for it is is even even greater. I would say than for meat. Well, it would be nice if they could figure out how to repopulate the ocean.


That would be wonderful because yeah, if you talk to people particularly if you watching documentaries on tuna and tuna fisherman in Japan and the way it used to be just 50 years ago and what it is now, it's a radical decrease the population the tuna. It's really frightening because we've done it in such a short period of time. Oh and So efficiently and there's no one hitting the brakes. I mean their dad the only parts of the ocean where which are still healthy are in like like either so far away that it wouldn't make any Financial sense to go fishing there or they're in politically contested Waters. Like when you start a war if you went there. Yeah, we've pretty much taken all the fish out of the ocean that we can do and also like the people who rely on the oceans these people who live on the coast are really suffering and quite often.


They're there the poorest People so it's a total disaster what we've done to the oceans the yeah. It's another human problem. We're weird. We are so that weird about it. It's what is bad about human beings. I would say is our greediness and we don't have to be greedy and we live we live in a system that is encouraging us to be greedy all the time and assumes that we are greedy and that we just want more and more and more because that's what's required for the system to carry on working. Whereas in fact we don't have to be Be greedy we can say this is enough. Yes people like you again introspective intelligent people who are rare. Well, it's not just that I interviewed.


This guy. There is one guy I could find so normally there are people who campaign against all of these Technologies and I sure I was going to find some crazy animal rights group or some vegan group that would you know, because because animal rights activists they can get nasty and certainly in the UK. They've done some very extreme things to fight against, you know animal cruelty as They see it and there's no organized opposition to Growing meat in Labs. Even though there are there are some some animal-rights reasons to be worried about it at the moment. A lot of meat that's grown in Labs is grown in this stuff called fetal bovine simmer at serum which comes from the calves of the hearts of cars that are fetuses when they're pregnant mothers are being slaughtered in the abattoir.


They put a needle Into the Heart of the calf and pull this stuff out in the serum is the beauty IAM in which the cells are grown and they're working on finding other ways of growing the cells but at the moment that's the best stuff to use. So you'd expect there to be some animal rights argument some fight against these people but there isn't because it's seen as the Silver Bullet that's going to stop people from eating meat, but I found one person this British sociologist of vegan sociologist who is who says that, you know, actually the answer in all of this is that we have to stop thinking of me as being know the answer is To Tavis of techno fix that solves the problem. We just have to stop feeding me to our kids so much and then they won't have such an appetite for it.


You know, the appetite is learned. There are people who've been vegan for a long time. Who when they try and eat meat again, they can't digest it or they think it's disgusting or they hate the texture of it. Those people are pretty rare. You think you think people back to it with open. I think they do. I think the smell of cooking smells amazing. My sister's been vegetarian for like thirty years and if she eats meat by mistake, it's revolting to her in her mouth. It's just feeling kind of think that's odd. Well as someone who loves me I can't I can't empathize with it, but I can understand if you haven't had it for a while. It's like eating a piece of muscle. Yeah delicious muscle.


But anyway, he said he said the answer is to you know, the way that cultural change happens is it's to do with the world that your children grow up in and we need to just and I kind of by that I mean I think about my son my son is six, you know, we had some upstairs neighbors who are in their 70s are a gay couple. They got married. This is just completely normal for him. And it's you know, it's normal for me as well, but it's still a little bit because it's not the world that I was born into where that happens all the time. I'm still like. Oh, wow. Congratulations, whereas for my son. It's like yeah, you know men marry women and very wet men women where he's been he's native into that world. And I think that's how you get social changes by making the Next Generation native into a world where where people think differently and I think the way that we're going to save the world I think vegans will save the world.


Not by doing the plant-based me or by growing me in Labs. But by getting people not to feed their kids meet. That's the answer. I don't know. They'll think it's disgusting. I don't think these how many children do not eat meat but that you can get the nutrition you need elsewhere. You can it's not bioavailable the same way it is with me meat is the most efficient way to get protein most efficient way to get amino acids. It is it is best way to get B12 and B12 deficiency is one of the biggest problems with vegans I call. Leave I'm here on your podcast making the vegan argument here at somebody who is not even a vegetarian. It's possible with some people to do it. Well, but there's also biodiversity and human beings people are very different and what they can and can't consume obviously.


Some people can't eat certain not so they'll die and other people have no problem with it whatsoever. We all come from different parts of the world. And that's that's a another problem with whether it's even with meeting some people their body. Just does not agree with eating meat or other people. I mean, there's there's some science to its rig disputed to what what blood type you are. And you know, I happen to be O+ which is supposed to be really good for meat. I eat a lot of meat and I'm very healthy. I've never had a problem with it, but I know some people that don't like me it doesn't sit well with them, but I know some people that have a real problem with grains, and I know some people that have a real problem with certain certain green leafy vegetables make them sick.


It sounds crazy but it's just it's true. I mean people people are people are and we are diverse and so it is a very it is a very efficient way of getting nutrition, but you will have to disentangle how much of our desire for me is cultural rather than biologically necessary when my daughter was a one years old. She was a baby. My wife was holding her and I was cooking ribs, and she's literally pulling away from her mother tried. To get ahold of my ribs because they tasted so good. She could smell it and then she's got that we have a video of this of her with this little rib bone and she's like with the little tiny mouth, but presumably that wasn't the first time she ate me those appreciate me because she wasn't I don't think she was one.


She's she was Tiny like she wasn't even walking yet. It was it was genetic. There's something in her little brain and her senses from smelling it she wanted that meat. Maybe it's because it's my kid. I don't know. Maybe it's learn I think you know, maybe there is something Primal about it, but that doesn't you know, but there's also a lot of Primal stuff about us that we don't act on ins. I love eating meat. I just feel like we need to not have so much of it. I mean it used to be like a big tree In England, we have the you know in Britain we have the Sunday roast, which is this traditional, you know, you would have one kind of big Feast on a Sunday sort of giant family to get together and it was an occasion and I think maybe we need to have a that more of a culture of that really but the answer is not telling people they should not eat any meat at all.


I think also because I think that's have you ever talked to people that are proponents of the carnivore diet. I have never spoken to any machine. Yes. I have it's fascinating because it's fascinating and it's all anecdotal of course, but there's a lot of people with autoimmune disorders that have completely cured those autoimmune disorders by eating only meat. They literally only eat meat and they eat nose-to-tail meaning they eat organs. They eat a lot of organ meat they get most of their vitamins from liver and heart and kidneys and they eat fatty cuts of meat and they're basically semi ketogenic because if you eat a Amount of protein your body develops this there's a process called.


I think it's called gluconeogenesis where your body converts protein into glucose. So it actually keeps you from being ketogenic but it's because you're eating so much room smell really bad. Doesn't it? This kind of stuff makes you smell bad see that's a vegan talking to you right now. Someone's trying to tell you if you eat the meat you're going to smell bad your breath be better. You know, what smells bad broccoli farts the people you talk lie. That's bad too. I don't know Sendai. Is this the diet that Jordan - Jordan Peterson is on that diet, but I would say it's not a poster boy for it. Not the best because Jordan has had a lot of problems. It was good for his autoimmune disorders, but he's had a few problems with you know, publicly recently with benzodiazepine and you know, all those getting off these antidepressant drugs and anti-anxiety drugs.


There's some other doctors though that are proponents of this. And they actually are prescribing it for people with autoimmune or disorders particularly people with arthritis and arthritis issues because a lot of people find that there's a particular with grains. There's a lot of inflammation issues that certain folks have with grains and glutens and all sorts of different things that you know, really basically fairly new in terms of human evolution of our consumption like yeah Breads and things along those lines. Yes, but then again that goes Goes back to this idea of of our of our insides being kind of that. We're kind of internally caveman and that we are designed to eat a certain way and be a certain way when we when we don't have to be that way because we have access to a wide variety of different kinds of you know, like right but the thing is they're talking about health consequences with this wide variety and when they have an Elimination Diet and one of the best elimination diets is this carnivore diet because you really really cutting out everything on the carnivore diet are people not getting can Says, well, it's not here's the thing.


It's not that studied and it's not there's not that many people doing it and there have been people that have done it for decades. But again the all this is anecdotal you would have to study people, you know, and I know the Harvard is actually in the middle of some long-term carnivore study that they're doing they're trying to find out whether or not there's any real science to any of this stuff because there are these people that have these autoimmune disorders that are clearing up. I did it for a month. Was pretty fascinating it was really interesting. Why did you well because I love food. I just love food, you know, I love pasta and I love bread and I love vegetables. I love all kinds of food and it was very it's very limiting to only eat meat but I did it for a whole month ain't nothing but meat for one month.


I mostly steak and liver and Wild game and a lot of animal fat. I felt great. It's kind of crazy. How good it felt. Yeah. I lost 12 pounds. And I had energy all day long. That was what was weird about it was there was no lulls like my energy stated a constant state all day long. Very strange. It's right. You should try it just for a good cause maybe that's my next book is, you know, investigating the carnivores and seeing if they're all right. The weird thing is the complete elimination of brain fog. I found that fascinating. I mean, I did a video afterwards I showed how much weight that I lost because I I got in kind of fat.


I had been eating too much. I'm a glutton and if given enough time like I will eat I eat so much I massive amounts of food. I just I don't know what it is. I just have always been a glutton and I work out a lot. So I stay pretty lean but sometimes I can go off the rails. Well, I just I just I'm not even hungry. I just keep eating. You know, it's really a kind of a crazy thing. But on the carnivore diet, I did lose a lot of weight, but it's very limiting in terms of like I I in Joy food, I like restaurants. I'll enjoy a chef's creation. I think it's fascinating when they combine all the different flavors and I love the art of it. I love the art of cooking.


I think it's an amazing art form that you enjoy with your face, you know, it's incredible. I love I love food. So to me it was like I'm not going to do this forever. I just can't I enjoy too many different things in terms of flavors, and and I also respect the the The culinary art form of cooking. I think this is it's it's to me it's a different kind of art. It's like it's like music or literature all the other different ways people Express themselves, but they express themselves through food and I respect that exactly it which is that food is not just nutrition is culture.


There is the culture of how we eat and the ceremony of eating together and appreciating the food and the way that the food is is displayed. Actually, probably the culture is is more important than than yes. It was. It's definitely more important than the nutrition. Otherwise, we will just be taking pills and and not eating. You know that me well, you wouldn't exactly nutrition from pills though you there wouldn't work. No, but if you could people wouldn't because and not just because they want the taste in their mouths, but they like the way that it breaks up your day that you should sit down have a meal it represents a certain occasion. You know, it's a huge part of what it is to be human is It is to eat and and and how our meals are assembled and how you know all of that.


Yeah, and that's that's a point when things are cultural. They're not, you know, we can change because we can change our culture whether or not we want to is up to us. But he's also one of the more interesting things about food is going to a place and experiencing this new culture. Yeah, and their new food. Yeah, like going to Thailand and eating authentic Thai food or going to Italy and India. Authentic Italian food. That is to me it's like one of the great ways of experiencing a place. I mean the late great Anthony Bourdain who was a friend of mine is the reason why I changed my opinion of food. I just think it tasted good but then I watched his program and I realized oh, this is an art form.


I had a Blindside I didn't I had a blind spot. I didn't look at it as an art form but his passion for Cuisine of her chefs and for the way they Prepared and Source the food from these, you know these Fresh Markets and got everything pieced it together and then present it I was like, oh I was looking at this wrong. This is Art. I didn't think of it that way. Now, I think of it that way. That's why I can be carnivore. I just like food too much just it's too important. I like wine. I like all of it. I like all of it together. It's like I also ultimately a lot of this comes down to what is what is life for? What is your life for? I mean, there are these people who are life extension this to do whatever they can to. Prolong their life, but you would argue that the way they're living.


It's not a life worth exploring. You have to make choices in your life. But what do you want from Life? Are you going to do something a little bit unhealthy because yeah. Yeah, we'll make choices for me. It's really difficult. But I mean in terms of having written the book I've had like people interview me about it who are vegan who have asked me how come you're not vegan now how come having having written all of this and it's really really difficult because I tried to explain. Well, you know, I'm using Less meat and and you know, there isn't a moral argument you can make other than I really really enjoy it which makes you sound really superficial, but I enjoy and I have a family that enjoys it and it would involve a huge disruption in our lives.


Yeah. It's a weird one, right? I think the real argument is health. I really do I was vegetarian for six months back when I was fighting I did it to try to make weight and I my performance suffered and maybe you know, you could argue that it wasn't doing it correctly, and I'm sure I wasn't but boy when I started eating It again, I felt so much better like instantaneously. I felt better and then it corresponds with today to do it. Well, you just need to do to live really well on a vegan diet. You have to be very organized and you have to go and and I don't think people I don't think everybody could do that. Well, I think you have to be first of all, it has to suit your body. You have to be organized you have to be diligent and you have to be educated you have to really understand supplementation and do it correctly.


One last thing I want to talk to you about is death. Yeah, another thing you cover please expand on your thoughts about death. So I was looking at the perfect death and that we have this kind of dream that you could maybe take a tablet and fall asleep painlessly and peacefully at a time of your choosing but actually that That doesn't really exist or other it does exist. There is one substance that you can take that will give you that death and it's a particular substance. It's what they give they used to give prisoners on death row.


It's what they give animals when they put them to sleep, but it's illegal to possess privately almost everywhere in the world. And so at the moment if you want to be in control of your own death, you either have to put yourself at risk of death. That isn't very nice by doing some risky things. That might not work out. For you and might be horrible for people who find you or you have to get a doctor to help you die in a place where assisted dying is legal. And so I was watching this from the perspective of being in the UK where it's not legal at all and I was looking at there are some doctors that will for a fee teach you how to kill yourself in the best possible way.


Like either have to get hold of these illegal drugs or other ways of killing yourself that are supposedly peaceful and Painless and what is that? What is the thing that these to give you remember tall? It's a barbiturate. Hmm. So the company he used to make it as a Danish company called Lindbergh and they stopped providing it to death row facilities. I think in 2011 because it became very controversial that they were doing it, but it's the same Bob it just what Marilyn Monroe took when she killed herself, but I wouldn't recommend anyone try and get it because at the moment if you try and get it you have to do lots of stuff on the dark web and Might be sent the wrong stuff and nobody wants to be taking the wrong stuff when you've decided you're going to die.


Whoo. Yeah, basically the the what the investigation that I was doing was looking at whilst we haven't worked out how to give everyone the right to die. There are people who are stepping into that void and telling people I can give you control over your own death. I can give you the perfect death and I looked at different people we've invented death machines that can supposedly do this. But there is a guy at the moment called Philip Nitschke who has developed this 3D printable capsule which looks like a kind of James Bond vehicle or a kind of I don't know a spaceship you get the plan. So you have to be a member of his organization you get the plans and then you go and you print out this capsule you pour liquid nitrogen into the base of it and then you lie inside and died in about two minutes.


Oof. Yes. I saw this big displayed. It was I went to Venice to this design show in Venice where it was being unveiled and it was a strangely beautiful thing, but it's a kind of symbol for me of how ridiculous this is if we talk about overshoot engineering again. All we need to do is give people the right to die. We don't need to be able to give people the means to 3D print their own death because ultimately I think it's probably a good idea if other people are involved, Both and doctors are involved because who's to say that you wouldn't decide to do this if you were drunk or bereaved or might one day decide that you wanted to live and until we've kind of worked out.


How to frame laws in ways such that vulnerable people aren't exploited or vulnerable people aren't killed using these right-to-die laws. There are going to be people who step into the void and and give people who maybe you shouldn't necessarily have it a way of killing themselves. It's another very human problem in that. It's very messy. Look if you have someone who has terminal cancer and they're constantly in pain and they're going to die. Why why do we have this archaic idea that they have to Ride This Out to the end tightly all that. There's anything no language is a bit about their fight against cancer or them losing their their battle. I mean, I really think you talked about, you know, if aliens were looking at us I look at it in terms of people 200 years from now when they are studying this era in history.


What will they look back on and think God they were Bob Ariat at that time and I think the two things definitely or drugs. And the right to die and the fact that we let people suffer but the people who want this death machine or who are trying to buy nembutal that I looked at. They aren't terminally ill there people were kind of baby boomers who are used to having control in their lives and being in charge of their own destiny who are terrified of things like getting Dementia or motor neuron disease and terrified of losing their dignity. And so they want to be able to own something in their home or I'll have the plans to something. That will mean that they will still be able to be in control at the end.


But death is you know, the point is it's a symptom of the fear that we have of death rather than an actual solution to the to that problem. I think we also have a fear of people making an error like people who are they're experiencing great grief or they're experiencing the depression that comes from the loss of a job or a broken relationship or whatever it is and they would make a hasty decision. Vision that they would regret later where we'll obviously can't regret it, but other people in their life or certainly going to regret it, but but if they just hung in there if they just found in there and wrote it out and sought counseling and sought the advice and the the love of friends and family they could get through this and be stronger on the other side and find a new relationship find a new job whatever it is and you don't have to pull the cord.


But I think it's like who are we to tell people when they can and can't what works really strange and that's what this doctor says. This doctor is a Libertarian and he says it's ridiculously paternalistic that doctors should be able to say I know your mind better than you do. I know you better and he says that you could develop an AI that could tell whether or not somebody was of sound mind. He personally thinks if you're depressed you should still be given the advice on how to take your own life. It's still your choice. It's a choice that you can make rationally if your Press your mentally ill that's a different matter. But it he's saying it's all about, you know, taking back control the individual. It's your life. You should be in charge of it.


But the problem is there are so many stories. I mean, I don't know if you've seen that documentary The Bridge about people who jump off the Golden Gate and there's that person there who survived who said who talks about that visceral feeling of being in the air and thinking oh my God, what what have I done? Yeah. And the point is you kind of do need mm Gatekeepers to take you through the decision that you're making and I think the idea that I just think most of the doctors who are in places where the right to die is legal who are involved in making those decisions are not people who are reveling in their power, but they are people who are genuinely trying to find out if this is what you really want and I think you kind of do need those Gatekeepers when you're because it you know, it is always a life-or-death decision.


It has to be the right decision every time. Just it's a strange thing that we impose our own ideas on whether or not a person can or cannot end their life. Like we say no. No, you have to keep going like they're the law says You must keep going. It's very odd because it's I want them to get better. Like I want people who are feeling depression and want to end their life. I don't want them to do it. I don't want them to but I also So don't think that I should be the person who can tell them whether or not they can or can't but in some countries with the right to die is legal. So for example in the Netherlands in Holland and in Belgium, you can you can you can be given the right to die.


You can be helped to die if you're depressed or if you're a chronic alcoholic who can't he says I don't think I'm ever going to be able to beat this. It's making me miserable and I think a really large proportion of the number of people who are euthanized in those countries have something like depression. So that's not to say that you could You wouldn't allow people who are depressed to take their own lives. It just means you have to have come to a conclusion that there's no reason to think they're ever going to feel better. That's the point and if there's ever a case to objectively think that someone might be able to feel better with medication or counseling or a change of circumstances, then then you know, there has to be hope for people but the alcoholic one is a weird one because have exhausted all possible alternatives.


So in that case like have they explored psychedelic therapy, which is illegal but massively effective for people that are addicts particularly. Ibogaine. Ibogaine is incredibly effective for people that have addictions to opioids alcohol even cigarettes even lifestyle problems and yet it's completely illegal in this country, but there's lots of people trying to there's lots of entrepreneurs working on it on there on finding a way. Getting it to Market and they're doing clinics in Mexico. I have a friend who owns a clinic in Mexico and he started this Clinic after he went down to Mexico to D. He had lower back pain from an injury that was severe and got hooked on opioids and went to Mexico went through an ibogaine clinic and got therapy and then completely snapped.


He was completely cured of it and realize like okay there is an actual real workable. Alternative to all these different methods of getting off of it and it's some for some reason not available on this patch of dirt. I have to drive across a border this weird fucking wall and and go to this place and that's where I can do it but it works so he just started up a clinic in Mexico started bringing people that he knew had problems with it and it's not again not just opioids but alcohol all sorts of behavior problems. It's a very ruthlessly Respect of experience. Apparently I haven't I haven't currently I personally rather done it but I know many people who have and they said it's been an amazingly beneficial.


I know several people who have kicked pills that way. It is incredible really that we have, you know, good drugs and bad drugs. This is what I mean, like in 200 years time the idea that you know the still in the UK, you know, pretty much everything is banned and even there are epileptic kids who've had to fight to say that they they need, you know cannabis-based. Medication it stops there sieges. They've had to really really fight for this in the UK, but it's because of you know, it's because of the way politics works, but it's it is it's ridiculously short sighted in the sort of thing that's going to be that would be we're going to be really embarrassed about one day. I think that it was ever like this but but yeah, there's amazing stuff going on.


There's amazing, you know boundaries being cross if we would just allow ourselves to embrace them and it you know, I'm a pretty hopeful person. That's the thing and I really believe that human beings are Couple of wonderful thing clear and that's why I that's why I feel like they're the idea of entrepreneurs taking advantage of our anxieties and saying that they can make money by providing us with quick solutions that stop us from looking at why we're afraid or why we're greedy or why we don't want to compromise in relationships. I think that's a real shame. I agree with you Jenny. I really enjoyed talking to you. I really did and I really hope I really hope you do a podcast.


I think you'd be amazing at it. I've caught sooner don't I abuse are going to do a podcast and I've got to do a podcast don't be aware. But until then your book sex robots and vegan meats available now everywhere. Is there an audiobook and do you read it? There is no dear book and I read it. Yes, absolutely. Love doing it. So yeah, get the audiobook get the e-book get the book. It's a good book. Thank you very much Jenny. Appreciate you. Thank you very much. Thank you, bye-bye. Thank you friends for tuning into the show, and thank you to our sponsors. Thank you to Casper go to Casper.com and use the code Rogan for a hundred bucks off your mattress order that's used the code Rogan for $100 off your mattress order terms and conditions apply see Casper.com terms.


Thank you. Also to Simply Save awesome home security. News & World Report named the best overall home security of 2020 head to Simply Save.com Rogan and get a free HD camera for listeners of this podcast that simply saved.com Rogan go there and make sure that they know that we sent you. Thank you. Also to Squarespace the host of my website Joe Rogan.com and the place where you are going to go to make your next website. You can do it by yourself. You don't need help that got it dialed in your simple easy to use drag-and-drop user interface and beautiful designer templates are they're perfectly made and you can try it for free.


Oh, that's what you want to hear. Go to squarespace.com Joe for a free trial and then when you're ready to launch use the offer code Joe to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain from Squarespace. And thank you also to the motherfucking cash app download the cash app from the app. Door or the Google Play store today and when you do download it, make sure you use the promo code Joe Rogan all one word. You will receive ten dollars in the cash app will also send ten dollars to our good friend. Justin friends fight for the Forgotten charity building Wells for the pigments in the condo. Thank you friends, then I hope you enjoy the show.