
Hello friends, welcome to the show this episode podcast is brought to you by square space square space to the host of my website Joe Rogan.com and it's an awesome way for you to make a website. You don't have to have any special skills. If you can move files around on a desktop, you got all the skills. You need to make a big beautiful website with their easy to use drag-and-drop user interface and they're gorgeous designer templates. It's a it's amazing how easy it is to use and you will make something that you will be proud of and you'll be amazed. They have powerful e-commerce functionality that lets you sell anything online. Each website comes with a free online store.


Everything is optimized for mobile right out of the box. You can customize the look The feel the settings the products and more with just a few clicks built-in search engine optimization free and secure hosting nothing to patch or upgrade ever and 24/7 award-winning customer support. I Can't say enough good things about Squarespace. So many people have sent to Squarespace to build a website. I've come back to me. So this fucking easy. It's so awesome. You make an amazing website that a regular person can make and they're so confident of that. They'll let you try it for free. If you go to squarespace.com Joe you get a free trial and then when you're ready to launch just use the offer code Joe and you will save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.


Where also brought to you by The butcher box butcher box makes it easy for you to get delicious high quality 100% grass-fed beef free-range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood sent directly to your door with an unbeatable value. The average cost is less than $6 a meal and they have awesome flexibility. They have box options and delivery frequencies to fit your needs. And you can cancel at any time with no penalty. I am a gigantic fan of they're grass-fed beef.


They're grass-fed grass-finished. Rib eyes are my favorite. They are delicious, but you can choose what you like and you can choose your box and delivery frequencies. They offer five boxes for curated box options as well as the popular custom box. That's what I like. I go all grass-fed Ribeyes, but they have awesome Seafood. They have awesome chicken. Heritage breed pork it's all delicious, but you can get exactly what you and your family love each box ships Frozen for freshness and packed an eco-friendly 100% recyclable boxes and you can enjoy high quality meat delivered to your door free shipping anywhere in the lower 48 and they got the Hook-Up ground beef is back for life for a limited time.


Now new members can get two pounds of free ground beef in Butcher box order by signing up today at butcher box.com Rogan. So you heard that right? So as long as you keep your membership at Booker, but your but was it as long as you keep your membership at butcher box. You will get 2 pounds of free ground beef for life. That's butcher box. I should probably clean that up right weakly. No no ground beef. Okay. And you can get ground beef for life for a limited time. New members can get two pounds of free ground beef in every butcher box order by signing up today at butcher box.com / Rogan for life.


You understand that that means for as long as you keep your butcher box membership, you get 2 pounds of ground beef free in every order. That's butcher box.com Rogan go there and get ground beef for Life butcher box.com / Rogan. We're also brought to you by rev Town jeans. The only jeans I wear I wear these jeans went with you see me wearing jeans. You're seeing me wearing rev Town jeans. They are the Holy Grail of genes. They figured it out. Anybody who works out our exercises at all has trouble finding jeans that fit their thighs in there, but right well for the last 50 years it was either squeeze into some stiff sandpaper bullshit denim from China or go.


Up a size in the waist so it looks droopy and it looks like shit. That's what I used to do. I just wear a belt just cinch it up at the waist rev town was created by a couple guys who started Under Armour so they know about stretchy scientific fiber shit for making world-class performance workout clothes and leggings and other Gear Well, they partnered with this old-school denim designer in Milan Italy to create jeans that look and fit amazing, but they feel like you're wearing a pair of sweats or yoga pants. They're fucking awesome. It's the Perfect Blend. No wonder whether the fastest-growing denim brand for men and women at just 79 bucks a pair. They are less than half. The price of some of the so-called designer jeans.


We've been jamming our shit into four years and the fucking amazing pick up a pair at Reve Town.com Rogan. They got something special for you guys listening right now. You got to check it out have a head over to rev Town.com Rogan and bonus rev town now ships internationally so you can get them to delivered to your doorstep no matter where you live. So head over to rev Town.com Rogan to upgrade your denim game today. That's rev Town.com Rogan and we're also brought to you by manscaped. This is a pubic service announcement after more 18 months of research and development.


The manscaped engineering team has confirmed they have successfully created the greatest ball hair trimmer the world has ever known this new trimmer was just released only. Months ago in Australia, UK and Canada manscaped is taking over the world. If you live outside of the USA, you probably have grown a massive Bush because you haven't had the right products to trim down below without risking. Nick's to sensitive areas. Well, they're fantastic third-generation trimmer features a cutting-edge ceramic blade to reduce grooming accidents. Thanks to Advanced Skin save technology pioneered by man's Taped now listen I can read their stuff. But let me just tell you I use it and it's fucking awesome. It changed the game for shaving my balls. I used to be nervous when I shave my balls. That would shave my balls with the same thing. I shave my head with well my head is smooth.


It's simple you just just follow the Contour you have your balls are like wrinkly and shit and you could fuck them up and I have I make my balls every time I use a regular razor regular electric razor, but not with this manscaped lawn mower 3.0 its A better they've also upgraded to a 7000 RPM Motor with quiet stroke technology trademarked. They've also just released their shears 2.0 nail kit, which is a perfect add-on to their lawn mower 3.0 or perfect package. They make awesome stuff. No one likes a nun groom set of feet fingers or more importantly balls. So trim that junk off yours get 20% off plus free shipping when you go to manscaped.com.


Rogan all my Aussie United Kingdom Canadian and us a friends you need to get these manscape products get 20% off and free shipping by going to manscaped.com / Rogan. That's 20% off free shipping at manscape.com Rogan. Trust me your balls will thank you. All right friends since this episode is going to be released on September 11th. I could think of no better person to be with me today than the most American motherfucker. I know. Tim Kennedy, he's a former UFC fighter Ranger sniper Special Forces operator. And again the most American motherfucker. I know and a great human being and a patriot and just an awesome guy.


Please give it up for the Great and Powerful Tim Kennedy. The Joe Rogan Experience trained by day Joe Rogan podcast by night why kind of course come bearing gifts to new Texans. So that's that's a separate thing. But I did I was at the range working and I was wearing a Hawaiian shirt. It wasn't even a wind sure. I bought it in Czech Republic and but it looked like Hawaiian shirt and in the comment section as in body armor, I had my And I was literally working everybody was like, oh my gosh, you're wearing a Hawaiian shirt all your part of this super extremists like white supremacist group and I was like what I'm wearing a Hawaiian shirt and they start like freaking out like cancer culture and it's like I bought that it doesn't matter where I bought it, but now because you're telling me I'm not supposed to wear it because I guess one in church or for a uniform for white supremacist.


Also got please Google this this is a new thing. Yeah. What? Yep Hawaiian shirts are white supremacy do it. So of Of course. The first thing I did was liked by everyone sure. I can possibly find just because I'm not supposed to you know, who the fuck is saying this I need to see this. That is the dumbest thing I've ever heard. How can a Hawaiian shirt be white supremacist? I don't think there's any logic ever attached to any of these things. No, but um like the boot I think like the Boogaloo Bros. That's what the Wall Street Journal says. Why the extremists Boogaloo boys wear Hawaiian shirts, please put that up on the screen. I need to see this fucking nonsense. What? Oh my God, this is real why the extremists Boogaloo boys and the joking?


Oh my God. Aloha shirts have become a disconcerting signature for members of a gun-toting. Anti-government was a say you made a little too big. I work for the government. So faction does it does that cancel this to my God in the past couple weeks following the killing of George Floyd curiously dressed counter protesters have attended scattered demonstrations across the u.s. Armed and disconcertingly garbed in Magnum. DIY style floral Hawaiian shirts magnetized pretty fucking America. Yeah, it's pretty epic three things here. They're really comfortable florals a great pattern and they're very breathable and you can end on the Range. I like do the top button thing and pop a collar so you don't get hot brass down your neck because we're shooting it done.


So it's like a don't get burned on to be redneck, you know, like I hate white supremacist, but what's wrong with Hawaiian shirts? We can't let them take away Hawaiian know that's the exact point that I'm trying to like you. Tell me the things that I'm not supposed to do and I'm going to do those things because I'm not going to let you take those things from me. Then we are far-right Boogaloo movement is using Hawaiian church. That's a chubby sure tensions the dude right there on the far right? I have that shirt. Oh, they wearing the shirts to hide their intentions what Oakley they wear them because they're comfortable and they're breathable. And there's this one stretchy. They're taking away everything fun. You can't even do okay anymore. Remember? Okay is now I still do that I do too.


Been around way too long. You can't steal. Okay, but I've been skydiving military. Like like I can't I don't know what the other symbol is for not. Okay, there's some things that it's like gay people took over the rainbow. Okay, you can have the rainbow. I like my son really likes the rainbow. I like rainbow six five. I know I'll still wear a rainbow. I don't give a fuck off for sure. But I do recognize that. I mean at least they have partial ownership of it. Yeah, but like the okay sign. You can use the emojis to text people. Yeah, and I cannot help but use the okay sign for anyone the Emojis yet is for any positive response controversial? It's not what about thumbs up? When's that going to be bad?


Pretty soon. It has to be fucking stupid. This is some other country correct comes up is yeah that when I was young there was taught us like your middle finger means something America, but unlike some other country. It doesn't like thumbs up in some countries real bad sort of like cunt in English.. Like Italians like do the trick. Cynthia yeah, but like you countries mean different. Okay. I don't know how bad it really mean if they're really gonna get pissed but I've heard it's not always This find out where the thumbs up is bad. I'm never going there get the thumbs-up. I want to find out where saying okay is bad and then I'll gang it to her to hear Most of those started off with four champ.


Just fucking around for challenges protect and Iran Greece Russia, Sardinia and parts of West Africa. Erica the thumbs up is as rude as the middle finger is in the UK. So no posing in front of the Parthenon making the thumbs up gesture like a nerdy tourist. Oh god... I'm doing it if I go there I'm yeah, I'll do that for sure. I'm in West Africa bunch and we're - I'm this this is this is okay. Okay. Yeah, and there's only black people there. Yeah, so nobody's getting mad at my okay symbol.


They probably do it too. I've got a picture of Beyonce doing it. I saved a bunch of pictures of black folks doing the okay symbol and I was sending it to my friends. People were saying that there's something wrong with the okay. I'm like, you can't take away something that's been around forever. That just means okay and the whole the thing about there were some people that were doing it like upside down. So that's a military thing. Oh, okay explain that. It's an asshole. This is an asshole. So the game is at any moment, you know, we're talking over here. Like I mean, I hurt my leg down here and if you look at it, I got you and I get to flick you in the dick. Really. Yeah, so I pop wait a minute, but if you can say insulate if you can get your finger in there what so it's a game that has existed in every single basic training. You have to remember that the audience were talking about here.


Like these guys are volunteering to go to war so they're not right but I mean this this for as long as I'm in the military for 16 years, this is an asshole and the game has always been like gotcha. It's a gotcha moment if they look down at it. So if you do that that thing and then someone sees it they have to stick their finger in it or you hit them in the dick. Yep. Okay. Yes. That's the game. There are rules to the game. Like 2 years ago, I still play this with my friends, but it became this whole thing, but I never heard of this It could also be internet 4chan meme shit where they're taking it to another level and giving would remember when those cops that's what they all got in trouble because they were taking the picture and everyone is saying these cops are doing the The white power thing but you're saying that's not what that it is at all.


Now, so West Point at one of the recent graduations, I think Trump spoke there a bunch of the West Point graduates were doing that simple because the W and the Pea yeah. Well, that's what the the article was like. Oh no a bunch of white supremacy are graduating from West Point. And so there's a huge military investigation. I mean Pentagon sending people out to research this and they're like, oh shoot. It's them plain an asshole game. This is actually not better because now our West Point the most prestigious Military Academy. Our graduates are playing their senior year at a trump graduation the asshole game and the asshole game has consequences and those are dick-slap.


Yep. That's right. Unless you get your finger in there and then you're safe. That's some fucking ridiculous. We have to we have to like amuse ourselves what the problem is with someone and be able to write an article like that and say this is a white power symbol and then also, In these people get labeled as white supremacist and then there's no repercussion because once the Articles out there, even if you have a retraction the art the original articles still out and the damage is done done done and those guys are labeled as white supremacist when they really just dorks. Yeah. Have you ever read a retraction? Not one? No. No, I don't believe I have yeah, maybe someone showed me one a couple times, but the when someone gets accused of something like that, that's pretty heinous thing like retractions not going to reach the same.


Of people know I would be enraged if somebody was like, hey, you're a white supremacist because you did this thing and that's like not always promised and that thing is an asshole. Like, how are we going to equal this out here is that's not forgivable. They should be sued and it's like you're doing some reparable damage to someone it's just so weird today. Everyone is just like I can't imagine a time where people are more outraged about more things. Yeah. I really think it's just you see more people that I really just think it's a small percentage of people that are always outraged. Yeah on both sides all the time and now they have an opportunity to talk about it more now.


Yeah, because we're all connected and they can piss other people off. I just want to go to both sides and like give people big hairy ogre troll hugs. Like it's all gonna be. Okay, you know like we love you, it's fine. Yeah, please stop tweeting my truck. Just give me your phone. You're not allowed to tweet anymore. At least he's funny sometimes. Times sometimes he's fucking funny man. He makes me laugh like 1 out of 10 times. I will laugh out loud at his tweets. Yeah, you know, yeah, first of all sometimes I laugh out loud because I can't believe the fucking president. I can't believe that guy is the president and then he'll say shit and I'll just go. Oh my God when he called the girl that he fucked that that porn star when he called her horse face.


I'm Twitter. I was like, this is amazing. I'm so crazy. I'm amazed at that. Man's President right now president acting President right on a woman. He fucked horse face. Yeah. Oh my God. It's a just as the weirdest 2020 what a time. It's amazing. But I mean, you know, there's some I wish I could be doing stand-up right now, you know, if I could do stand-up it would be more fun because if he stuff I mean so much to tear out of here, but yeah, but actual material that you could work out about today. Holy shit. There's never been a bigger gold mine that we hit everybody's like you got some pans out of the river. I don't think you're going to talk about It though. Oh, yea you are. I mean, yeah, I know you think that comedian should be allowed as I do I think comedy is the best way to address socially sensitive issues.


Yeah, like if you can't one of the things that the military is there's a lot of dark humor and people kind of look at us as these scarred damaged people because of that humor, but the truth is like we're able to talk about those things through this humor, and whether it's like a release for post-traumatic stress or just how we're able to get to the next day. How are able to go and do some of the things that we do it's because we're allowed to joke and laugh and burn that stuff off these sensitive times. And I think that's what comedy does to these socially charged issues. Yes and JP Sears long-haired kind of hippie YouTuber. He has been recently kind of attacking how comedians can't make jokes right now and how everything has been charged and there's not Away, like you can't make racist sexist jokes or political jokes whatsoever without being canceled and as like, that's the best time to do it.


Yeah Ari shaffir had the best quote about that. He said this is a great time for common because commies actually dangerous again. It's cool. It's actually dangerous. Yeah, or it's like five years ago. You would say something people didn't like it. They didn't come see you. Yeah now they'll attack. Yeah and you have Consequences, but I think you just have to structure your bits better. You have to you have to treat them like Doug Stanhope has a great quote that he was talking to me about he said I go over my bits. Like I'm a defense attorney. Like I like I am up. I'm going over my bits like I'm being prosecuted for with you know, someone's using the bit against me. And so I have to figure it out like a defense attorney might that's a great way of looking at it. Yeah, but what a horrible approach in the process to it, isn't it isn't because he writes the joke first and then he figures out how to To make it bulletproof, you know?


Yeah. Well I I have my method is usually I shit on myself so hard that by the time they get to shitting on someone else. Yeah, like I've already figured out like most of my bits that are controversial they start out with me belittling myself, like in the most vicious way. I can't like explaining what a fucking idiot. I am and then all the dumb shit that I've done that's related to this thing and it like when I wanted to make a joke about Caitlyn Jenner what I talked about was the They had talked about is how living with all women. I have three daughters and my wife liked the way I described it was it's like if my manhood was a mountain of marbles everyday they take to like you have so many marbles God is everyday snatcher marbles natural marble and my whole bit was getting to I was wanting I wanted to get to people saying he was born a woman.


He's always been a moment. I was like, maybe or maybe if you live with crazy bitches long enough All day they fucking turn you into one. Maybe you go crazy. Maybe that too especially those ones especially those ones and so I had to figure out a way to do and so I came up with this thing whether demons and they whisper in his ear in the middle of the night and they talked him into being a woman. I'm glad it took forever to figure out a way but I have but it worked like it worked and people didn't get mad at me for it. I just had to figure out a way to do it where I first of all I belittle myself and then I explain it in a way where it's not it's not Humanizing trans people. It's just it's like saying are we sure?


Yeah. Are we sure? We lost a fucking Olympic gold medalist. God damn it. We lost one of our greatest athletes ever look in the record book. What is it saying now under Bruce Jenner? What does it say? I don't see it. You even allowed to say that anymore. I don't think you can Wikipedia is going to put up whatever they want, which won't be factual. But how would the record books portray them how they handle it if you say that on Twitter, you'll get banned for life. If you call him Bruce Jenner on. Twitter it's dead naming the ban you for life good to know so areas that that vexes me in a different way. Yeah. Yeah the fact that you have to think about a joke and its political or cancel culture ramifications to make sure to politically correct enough for it to be bulletproof.


Whether you like your defense attorney at that sucks to me. It doesn't it doesn't because it is it's an opportunity to make your jokes better. You can just make them and and again if you can get away with it. Yeah, it's more sweet. Juicy, yeah, and I've really liked that first amendment thing, you know, they're really like being people being able to say things that make my blood boil and I don't want them to say things that are like, I don't wanna drink this coffee when it's lukewarm, right? And I think that's what conversation is when you're put it when you're everything politically correct is just this disgusting gross version from have champagne. I want to be freaking cold. Yeah, you know, I know just perfect 30 36 degrees.


I don't look warm coffee. I don't look warm champagne. I want perfect and that's what that's what communication is. And when you start neutering how someone can talk like that that's not being able to express an idea. You're limiting the counter that those that when you do get away with it, it makes it even more powerful a jerk. I'm tellin ya I'm tellin you man. The jokes that I've said on stage that are against political correctness that are good like the way I've figured out a way to weave some of them. When they hit man, they hit like a bomb like the whole room is like black like they know I go, you know, I'm right, you know what I'm saying? Like, I'm not bad person. You know what I'm saying?


Like I have this this whole chunk that I do on on Banning words and the whole chunk. It's like it took forever to figure out how to manipulate it and get it to this place where it's you can sneak it in on people and sneaking in on people that would ordinarily say those words in polite. Company and people would are assholes are tense up but you can get it in and when you get it in, whoa, it's a lie, bam. Yeah, but I'm with you man, you know, I want whiskey to get me drunk. I don't want fake whiskey. No. Yeah, I'm not interested. I think there should be consequences. I think I think the best way to combat things that you disagree with is to say how you feel not not to say that person shouldn't be able to say that that's ridiculous.


That's dumb. I was watching this video yesterday and these guys are just saying dumb shit. We're talking about people getting cloned in China. And this lady goes deep platform that shit. Seriously. She's like what now? I want dumb people to say dumb things. Yes, especially appellate to our politicians. Like the I think the art of listening has been lost. One of the best things about I think this podcast is that you're a good listener, right? It takes it takes a decently smart human that has a self confidence and develop interpersonal skills to listen that's lost in current culture where I am going to get so vessel or this this really outraged at something that somebody saying I can't even hear their point of view.


Even if that point of view is wrong. You want that person to say that? Yeah, and the Dumber it is the more I want them to say it because the Dumber they sound and the more we Collective logical reasonable person. People are like well that person's really dumb and his ideas are not going to work. So let's not follow him anymore. And then we're able to proper have a calendar. This is what's wrong with what that person says, but the other you're supposed to D platform them. It's so bad. It's so stupid because then what if someone thinks that they should be platform you and I think you probably should be D platform for telling people they should be D platform. How about that? If you're the person that if that's more dangerous than some dummy thinking that they're cloning people in China and by the way, they might be calling people still.


No, I mean who the fuck look they can clone people. We know that we know everybody's gonna do it. Yeah, they're gonna do it probably do it. They're probably doing it. Look. I mean, it's the probably the least of our concerns, you know, I mean as far as overpopulation goes me trying to try and not to have as many people they mean That'll Walk the whole one-child policy forever. Yeah, it turned out to be disastrous and tilted everything extraordinarily mail. I mean, I would not be at want to be a man in China trying to find a woman no rights. I mean, I don't know if that balance that out yet, but that was a real issue for a long. Time I wouldn't want to be in China at all because I'm a big fan of pretty. Yeah. Yeah freedoms.


Nice pretty pretty pretty powerful goddamn important when you say d platform people you you don't think you're taking away freedom, but you are you taking away a little bit of freedom in if you get an extra important right now where people have been isolated for this whatever six five months now from covid where They're creating Echo Chambers when they're when they curate their own information access or like I'm not gonna listen this guy or I want this guy to the platform door. Any of the social media is obviously our limiting what kind of voices are being heard while you're sitting there at home for the past four months and you're just in this Echo chamber of your own ideas and people that agree with you it magnifies and radicalizes what you believe and there's no logical sale.


Soundboard there's no bounce off. There's no pressure check. There's no refiners fire to those ideas because it's an echo chamber. Yeah and like you're reading the exact same things on Twitter. You're seeing the same things on Facebook. You're looking at the same things on Instagram. Then you turn on the TV and of course, they're saying all the same things that you already agree with they're just these ideas continued and gained momentum and they're not real because of never been tested against anything that disagrees with them or that that contradicts them and all I think all ideas have to go through that process. Us for them to be real is that that that refiners fire of is this really going to work? Let's apply pressure and find out. Yeah, there's this is defund the police thing that's going around right now.


My friend Matt had this funny thing that happened he has a son it sounds about 25. I think he said and his son was talking about defunding the police and he's arguing with him and Sons, you know real liberal in the whole deal. Then it's time to stay in that they have a beach house and it's an old house. The house was making like some crazy noises. He ran outside and called his dad and he Said there's something going on the house. I'm going to call the police. He goes. I thought you wanted to define the police because now you're the fucking house is haunted and you're calling the police. What you went from Deep on the police to the house is making noise. Let me call the cops. Yeah, that's a pretty fast jump. I mean that's not only idiotic. It's dangerous. It's dangerous and stupid and it's everything it's everything wrong with these ideas that just get propagated online with that.


No one really thinks through but then they get they become a thing that you if you're cool you It if you're in the right group, you say it and that's what defund the police is and even fighting against those ideas for some reason you like if I believed if the funding the police is the dumbest thing you could possibly do do I think there might be problems with in law enforcement that should be addressed for sure for sure. Like how do you fix those you need funding you need funding right? Like I have a school that's underperforming kids are not graduating from high school and deal we should do we should take money from the school and we should give them fewer teachers and let's see if that's going to help. No, that's not gonna help. You have to give them more teachers have to get more funding have to give more access to information and then maybe that school starts performing a little better.


Police Department is no they're just humans right there imperfect. They need training. They need funding they need support right now. They need morale and they need people and they need to get rid of the people that suck. Yeah, they need those things too. And one of the best ways to do this through training you weed people out you find out who can't cut it. That's what that's what it's supposed to be for. Yeah, the one of the best things about Special Operations is that they're so much. Training and process that refiners fire the chaff in the wind like you throw that stuff up in the crap blows away and the good stuff comes back down. Then you take that stuff and you go and carry it into a fire and then you heat it and then you pull it out and you pound it. Then you hit it again. You pounded then heated you pound it and what you're left with at the end.


Is this pretty cool thing. If any of that is with law enforcement that all of those things can only occur through training and and they if you want to test somebody if you want to check if you want to find racism like having them show up to work for eight hours and letting them hop in a car and run out. You're never going to know what's inside of there. The only time you get access that you get Peaks at that is it at these stressful emotionally drained moments. Yeah, and the only time that you can create those is through training. I've been arguing that We should have that for all of our leaders. Like when we were talking about the mayor of California or the mayor of Los Angeles and the governor of California and the people that are deciding you can't trick or treat this year.


This is the new thing the one fucking holiday where you have to wear a mask you're supposed to wear a mask and they for whatever reason they've decided they're going to save people by stopping little kids the ones who have the least problem with this disease from trick-or-treating. It's fucking asinine. It is so dumb and I think Part of it is because the people that are in that position the people that are in the position of control, they don't have to be tested. They don't have to show their character. They just have to win a popularity contest that no one wants to enter no one wants to be the fucking mayor of La who's entering. No one wants to be the governor of California sell people self-serving people are entering, you know, mayor Adler here in Austin, you know like yeah the same shit.


Yeah. Just get out of here. Yeah. Is it is there a public servant that wants to step up, you know Eminem to sing that song. Well the real public servants. Uploaders there's nobody but they did they get so scrutinize and it's such a ruthless business. Yeah that the only people that you get laughter these wishy-washy milky people guy. I do wish that you know political parties were afraid of the people again. Yeah that that created a really healthy balance where they understand that they are represent that they represent their constituents and their job is to do what Their people want. Once they get into this certain level of political power. Power they kind of just do whatever they want and they forget that they're supposed to be representing the people.


I've never seen California so charged right now against California, like people are mad, you know protests in Long Beach in San Diego and more Largo like it's crazy. The number of people that are coming out and being like I'm not okay with what's happening right now and they shouldn't be it's insane for all they've given dorks the ability to tell people they can't work. That's what it is. Yeah and Governor Newsom and mayor Garcetti, those guys are dorks and they're in control of whether or not people can take risks and work. How can somebody tell you not to work? It's not scientific. It's not politically correct. It's even if it were scientific. How can you tell me not to work? Right, but you can't well the idea is that you're putting other people at risk by working because if you get infected other people are going to get infected too.


This is this the idea behind but it's a super flawed idea. I'll super out one. I'll volunteer to inject my neck with a high. Upper dharmic needle full of covid compared to my children starving to death because I don't work. Yeah and and some like the salon owners are like if I don't open up, I'm already four months behind on my on my mortgage or my rent to include this building. I'm going to be homeless as are my kids and you're gonna be dealing with that next month. If I don't open right now. This is people are just leaving this tank. I'm gonna go somewhere where have freedom. That's why so many people are coming here to Texas. Yeah. Well, they better remember why Laughs exactly that's important. I want to talk to you about that and I want to have Texas politicians on to try to explain what the checks and balances are in this state that have kept it from being fucked up and giving it the freedom that enjoys right now and one of the reasons why people are coming here in the first place in droves.


Yeah. I mean like from New York and California it I've I argue if you walk downtown Austin if you walked even up north like Lamar Parmer and usually hey where you from four out of five. People are going to be from California New York and like what you're not you're not from Texas to include myself and you know, and you like all you from originally, California Central California might get out here after. 9/11 happened I enlisted and you know, Georgia Fort Bragg deployments, Georgia Fort Bragg deployments that cycle when I was fighting I I like Texas and I could kind of live anywhere if I was going to go to New Mexico and do my training camps.


My wife is from the south. So she wanted to live in the south. She's from Louisiana. She took a DOT. She was a government contractor. So she took a Government Contracting job here. And you know, it was we knew were going to be in Texas. We didn't know where and Austin felt like California. So that's really how we ended up here is they have a special operative a huge outside of Fort Bragg, North Carolina. This has the largest group. Of Special Operations in the entire country. Really? Yeah interesting. Yeah. How'd that happen? Texas has the ideals that we kind of stand for actually have a present for you from the Texas Special Operations Community.


They're like, wait a second. So they when I say they come here in droves. We have hundreds of Green Berets and the state of Texas in from The border patrol workers that are still serving as Green Berets, they're police officers firefighters work for FBI, but they live in Texas so they can be Texans that are Green Berets that then have their their other shenanigan. Awesome jobs, Chooch. Wow. Yeah, you're surrounded by I didn't know well they figured out it's awesome here. Hmm. It is awesome. It's very unusual. I almost feel uncomfortable talking about how great it is here. Yeah. I want to make you uncomfortable in a little bit.


Let me give you a present. Okay, give it to me now. All right, so we can do this in, Texas. It's gone. Well, these are cigars another important. It's just as from the Special Operations forces the oppressor the bear and range lead the way it's our motto. All right. Thank you liberators of the oppressed. Damn that smells good. All right. One of these is yours and one of these is yours see which one's all right. So this one's yours. There's a pocket Constitution. So anytime you're like man, what are we supposed to do in this instance? You can just pocket Constitution. I love it. Yeah, you just reference real fast. Damn. It smells great.


Now we're talking about the First Amendment says Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof or abridging the freedom of speech, press the right of people to peacefully assemble petition the government for redress of grievances. So it has all of them in here. So this gun I took it has been shot. So I zeroed it for you. Beautiful. Got you're welcome to bring your guns. Now. It's got a loophole loophole Delta Point Red Dot on there. I love Leupold. So this is like ready to ready to go. It's zeroed. It's um, FN 509 compact Paula Jamie got a gun now.


Yes, I did. James is no longer my gun. That is your gun. Thank you very much. Thank you. Have you ever shot a gun? I thought you were gone. Jamie come over here. Yeah, so I just want rifles, right? Yeah that Cannon. I didn't know this is a dope what kind of shooter you were. So this adjusts to I can put this on anything. Like your bag or a fanny pack. If not, I'll get you a concealed-carry holster like that. I love this holster. Thanks. It's pretty handmade. So this is an f and 503 single stack 9 millimeter. So this is like what you could carry here around Austin and but this is very nice compact gun A lot of people right now and comfortable.


They've got guys are you uncomfortable? Nope. This is your first gun. Come here. Come here. Come here. Give me a hug. Give me a hug. Give me a hug. Come here. Listen, so welcome to you again from you can see I got my first gun from Tim motherfucking Kenny. Yeah, how about that and you never forget that I was because you came to Texas we're going to go to the range with Tim and Alex Jones. How about that boo Texas only I think it's a Halloween thing. You can shoot zombies. You can get in a group and shoot zombies not with real guns obviously, but like some zombie kill it like real people probably dressed up like zombies and I'll take paint ball hits. Really? Yeah, I'd somebody said it to be like, let's go we have like responsive targets that are built like zombies.


So you shoot him and like blood comes out and he's in the and we have they call him heavy metal zombie competitions. So it's like a 3-gun competition. So you have to shoot 45030 8 and 12 gauge and you only head shots count. So as you exist, this isn't far. Sounds like fun, right? Yeah. Wish I came here years ago. Zombie Safari Dallas is open every Friday and Saturday in October. Well, we're going yeah, we have to go to that weather is cooling off. So we're going to do a lot more helicopter Pig hunts 24 hundred rounds kill zombies. Now when you do the helicopter pick honks, how do you guys gather up to meet you have someone drives after the helicopter depends on where we're going and what we're doing so some some Branches, we are Exterminating.


So gather up to me know and some of them are disgusting. Let the meat still good now. It's not gross really know why they're like like you get an old male like maggoty. Rancid roast tough meat. I don't want that you get like a young sow. Yeah, but those old ones though. Seriously, if you put them on a smoker and you do it, right you brine them. They still taste good. Okay. Why talk when you have five billion pigs in Texas, why would you cook a nasty one would just gonna go get a nice sweet one over there? And there's so many of them like if we go next week I take you you would shoot 50 pics.


Why helicopter helicopter? Why would you pick a gross one? I see what you're saying. But it just seems like you don't want to waste the meat though. There are people that would be like that but let's talk about no, no food-wise. We're gonna Compare Food meat to sew on a farm 25% of your crop is destroyed by feral pigs. Yes every year so problem. If you're if you're if you had a million dollars, you're automatically off the top $280,000 of your crop is going Onto feral pigs. So you as a Rancher like seen heavy-handed hairy ogre like me to like wait, you'll come and kill pigs on my property and you want I don't have to do anything.


They'll welcome you how many times you've done this? I don't know thousand. I don't know. I've no idea that's a thousand times for helicopters. What a great place to yeah, but it's different. Though because instead of a pot so if something's moving fast like a vehicle if I was going to be engaging something moving. Let's say from the right to the left. I'm going to yeah, you have to lead it. Well when you're in a helicopter, you actually have to give a what's a negative lead. You're going to shoot behind it going too fast. Yea, so whatever speed if you're going let's say 80 knots you're going to have to be behind it about about the tail and the speed of that helicopter is going to make up the difference to give you a middle impact.


Oh interesting. That's how fast the helicopter going when you're shooting. Um, Depends on the pilot and like sometimes that's you as a shooter. You're just kind of having to judge how fast you're going and Shane who will fly with he's a great pilot. And so he'll it can't the helicopter like a 45 degree angle and open up the shooter door towards so we're only probably going like 30 knots so you can call not in miles an hour like one and a half. Why do they use not? I don't know. It's Naval and Aviation use it just to confuse people. Yeah. But at that speed you can aim point of aim Point impacted just wrap them up.


Yeah. Wow, you shot an effing 509 before know they're really good. Yeah structure fire. You shoot Glock. Yeah. It's real similar trigger little bit more combat feely. That's the compact so you can I don't know do you carry? It don't have a concealed carry. We're gonna fix that. Okay, like super fast. All right, excellent. Good to hear. Yeah. You can't be here. I gave you concealed holes carry state. Right open carry Stone, please. Stop you that yes, it's like very antagonistic almost. Yeah, but like that's what while I believe you have the right to do that. It's also one of those things that's like it's also dumb to do it from a tactical perspective.


Right? Why would you be sitting here with the thing that you want right to protect you exposed to the whole entire world and telegraphing like if I walk into a room that's like the first time like One you're probably useless to is I'm concerned about you not as an asset that rather as a threat right? Like there's I don't know. There's not if you went out to any of the guys out here any of my friends like do open carry the bike? No, that's dumb. Am I gonna do that? Well, this that thing that like I was getting into about the protest when people are showing up at these black lives matter protest with a case around their neck not what are you doing? Jimmy times? They have accidentally discharged their weapons.


Into the crowd. I'm sure it's happened like a dozen times. I'm sure it's heartbreaking because like I respect that they're trying to like I fully believe in protesting love peaceful protest even like that that kind of bravado of open carry in that sense where they're like really I think a freedom not exercised is a freedom that's going to atrophy and die. One of the reasons why I love comedy is because you are pushing the limit of what people are comfortable with especially the First Amendment. Well, you're kind of torn an open carry in that sense. I think it's super dumb. But I like people exercising the freedoms interesting. Yeah, I see what you're saying though.


The right person. I won I would never be at a protest of while I support it. I would too dangerous to be there right now. So I wouldn't the cost versus gain of What happens at those peaceful protests and then the thought of even open carrying is is idiotic. I agree with that. I feel like showing up at one of those protests with a gun like unless they're coming to you and trying to take your house or break down your door. Why do you have why are you walking around with a gun? Just you suppose if it's supposed to be a peaceful protest and the idea is like what if someone comes to try to disrupt that peaceful protest like You're inviting them almost with that gun.


Yeah, every we had a poor kid killed here in Austin. He had an AK and poor Uber driver got in the middle of a protest and he's like, holy crap his his you know, when he dropped he had a drop-off and he went to go do another pickup and Uber like automatically routes the way to go. So he's following his little Uber out and he turns and he's like, oh man. I'm in the middle of a protest. He's a soldier from Fort Hood right here. He's concealed carrying in his Uber vehicle and he gets stuck in the protests and the protesters just swarm his car and this this this kid that died. He's actually really neat kid because you know his his girlfriend was black.


He's there to support her. She had a bunch of physical physical impairments and he's in a wheelchair. Yeah some he's like a neat kid you like not smart. He's open carrying at a protest, you know any you seem kind of something? I aimed toward things beforehand, but like I think his point in his purpose was really good and pure and like trying to do the right thing. But then he runs up to the side of a car and points a gun at an Uber driver that is scared and confused and he gets shot. Yeah, that's the recipe for disaster. I saw so many different versions of that story to where people had Twisted the facts people had said, he was unarmed people the guy who got shot people were saying that the guy who did it was a white supremacist who Rove into the protest on purpose there was so many the video is edited what looked like the guy was making a right-hand turn you like sped up because he was trying to get around a person and they cut right there because it looks like the guys speeding up to go into the crowd but super when you watch the whole video it's really obvious what that poor kid was trying to do the driver.


I saw a fascinating this PhD on communication broke down from the initial release of the information of the story how immediately started being just Jordan yeah for two different sides. They come to leave out this detail. I'm going to include this to you detail. And by the time you got you know, the game telephone we're like, hey, here's this catchphrase and by the time it gets all the way around the room. It doesn't sound like any semblance of what it did when it started when you got to the final version. I'm super enraged at one version and I'm super enraged at another version. But neither of them are true. And like that's what every single issue is happening from defunding the police to Black lives matter to antifa.


It's like can we just be reasonable and talk about what's really happening and we have some real good examples of what the worst case scenarios are in this country right now and one of us Portland like Portland is one of the best case scenarios of completely unreasonable ridiculous shit that's going on every single day now a hundred and one day Approach that they've got that fucking mayor up. There is the most Progressive mayor in the country and they're like fuck you resign. We're going to burn your house down here to move out. They're going to burn this place down. They tried to burn down his Lobby. They were throwing fiery things into his Lobby. They were lighting fires in front of Street in front of his house having dance parties in front of his apartment building.


So I was just coming back from Africa on an SFA Mission Security Forces assistance like a we the military go to places that have insurgents and we try to legitimize the process of government. So in counterinsurgency, there's like all of these different missions from joint combined exercises for training to foreign internal defense to sfa's Security Forces assistance and over there doing a counterinsurgency mission and I'm coming back and I'm seeing the same kind of horrible dangerous recipe. In Portland, you know the the same types of organization structure and and it's an Insurgency is a charged idea that you know Insurgency as the dod to finds it is an organized group trying to delegitimize or overthrow a constitutional government.


Like that's how the dod defines it and I think if you went to almost anyone in Portland like what are you trying to do right now? Like that's what they're trying to do. Yeah, right. Like that's what they believe they're open about it. Yeah, which is all right, and that creates a really hard. How do you combat that? Cause you have to combat the Grievances and the idea is you have to in as dangerous as it is those ideas are like a cancer because when truth and information is being adjusted just like we talked about with the shooting here in Then we have two different versions and some people are in the Echo chamber of only hearing one side of it.


It just keeps radicalizing more and more in Catching more momentum. And then the reason that they're there is is so convoluted with you know, if your are you there for black lives matter or you there? Do you know to fight systemic racism? Are you here to like? What are you protesting about? Like, I think you'd get a lot of different answers. Yeah, that's dangerous. Now you're Just there to do damage. Like you're not really trying to do anything. That's good. What's also exciting this is the other thing about it when when you're allowed to throw fire into the lobby of the apartment building where the mayor lives and no one stops you and you're out in front and people are playing music and dancing and everyone's going black lives matter is excitement to that right something's happening.


And then we're talking about people that are out of work the economy's fucked. One knows what to do. Everyone's scared covid killing a certain percentage of people you can't do anything about it. There's no vaccines. There's all this tension in the air and then you have this movement. Yeah. And then this is the most exciting thing that's happening. And then for people that don't have jobs and can't go anywhere. What the fuck do you want them to do? They're going to get sucked up into that. Especially if it aligns with their political ideologies their a left-leaning person and they're like, look we have a real chance for real Revolution here and this is But what they don't understand what I was talking about Seattle you're doing the same thing that you would hate for people to do you're taking over businesses with Force you're occupying land that you don't deserve you're stealing buildings.


You're literally occupying buildings that other people built and then once you get there, you're establishing boundaries you putting up barriers. You have a police force that will attack and brutally beat people up for just filming. They perceive as in justices or what they're going to put on the internet and then people get shot and you're calling the fucking cops. You call the police and ambulance is when people get shot there. Yeah, you know, I'm goddamn crazy. This is it's so poorly thought out across the board. And if you do that, if you take over an area what's to stop people from doing that to you? You've already set a precedent. You've already said we could do this with Force. We're going to move in with no law behind us with no Court ruling with no reasonable discourse.


We're Gonna move in with force and we're going to take over near with numbers and threats and then what's going to stop someone from doing that to you. Nothing you fuck you've already set a precedent. You already said this is how it's done and then it's just chaos and Anarchy like it just gets worse exactly and the more violent and larger group will win. So from a the the mission of counterinsurgency. Like how do you fight those ideas is stability and security right if we want to see positive change in you know, Because destitute poverty-stricken areas of the country urban areas where like really you don't talk about systemic racism. You start looking like Detroit and Baltimore and Chicago.


How do you fix that? It's not fewer peace officers. It's more police officers the way that you fix it is providing providing stability and Security in an area so that then businesses can flourish capitalism Rives more job opportunities more wealth more education more immediately in 10. Years you'll see that the transformation of a block when a when a good business comes in and good things are happening that business can't go there if it's dangerous if it's writing and it's looting so if you look at every one of the city's add serious riots and you know from like Rodney King how bad those areas still are it takes like 50 60 years if they ever bounced back to come back from that.


So if you're like, yo go black lives matter, but then you're going to Wiring you are absolutely condemning yourself to more poverty and then you'd go and defund the police and you remove the one thing that's going to provide stability and security out in that area that will bring in Commerce that will bring in business and jobs like you're screwing yourself. It's just so hard for people to see that because it's a long game and in the short term they want Justice and they're like, no justice. No peace. They just want to like shit on fire and I I understand that they're angry and understand that sentiment but it's something No one's explaining that this is this is how this plays out. You're literally going to fuck that area for a long time.


Yeah. Yeah, it takes a lot and a lot of money is going to be have to be spent in order to bring it back. Some of the money is a hard thing insurgencies are really cheap, you know, if If I wanted to ruin something, you know, it doesn't take a lot of effort for me to destroy it for me to build and protect something that takes a lot of Manpower hours and Manpower and hours insurgencies are also way more successful than a you know conventional type War even if it's just war of ideas that were in a civil war. Thank God we don't have like Geographic lines that these radical groups could align themselves with because then we'd be in a different problem.


It takes not just Manpower funding, you know, if you're going to flood say Baltimore with police officers, that's a lot of money and it would take a long time for a business to feel like it's safe and secure for them to go in there and start affecting positive change opening more stores more jobs more jobs more wealth more wealth more education more education better schools. And then boom we have a flourishing Community where people can prosper. But it takes, you know one idiot with a Molotov cocktail to bring that all crumbling down again when you're starting from scratch or below scratch. Yeah.


Yeah, that's where we are. Yep. I mean, this is a trying Time For Us in the weirdest of ways because I don't think anybody anticipated everything going this far south so quickly. It's not done. Oh, this is yours. What's up? Oh my Constitution. Hmm back up fuckers. Yeah. I got the papers. Yeah. I got the just how it is and it's not for interpretation. It's just as it is just read the words. Just amazing that these guys saw human nature and how it could be fucked up and how they could Ruin everything so far in advance. Do you smoke cigars? I don't you don't at all now. I'm a pretty straight edges person. Don't drink it all I'll have like a glass of wine every other night.


It's good for your blood. It's good for your heart. Allegedly. That's what they say. Yeah, that's the extent of it. Yeah, but you know, those are like epidemiology studies. Yeah. It's like how many people have a glass of wine every other night. How are they doing and look at them? It's not like they've proven a glass of wine does X or Y. Why how's it taste really good with elk days good? Yeah, I like it with steak. Yeah, I'm a big fan of red meat and red wine. That's a good comment and that's the have a big party liquor cabinet's of nothing that I ever drink that people just give me so people come over. I'm like, yeah, you can no mushrooms. No psychedelic. I've never done anything ever. That's nope. That might be part of your problem and we have lots of problems. There's no doubt that that is on the long dignified list of thought about it.


I thought about diving in and I have I've teenage daughters that when you know one's a freshman in college once a senior in high school and you know, if I ever thought about it, it's good and then I have a 11 month old and a 5 year old. So do do a lot of fucking yeah, all of them will be through school before I ever thought about it. I got it. My dad was a Narcotics officer. Oh, that's what and which was funny because I had like intentionally just to make mad I had friends that were drugged. Dealers but I would never I would never use but I'd be around it all the time. That's interesting. How do you avoid it?


I've been an athlete being a martial artist being a fighter. I was more into you know, being able to beat somebody up then not what was your first martial art you got into karate. What kind of Shotokan And then I went to Japanese Jiu-Jitsu after that attack every achillea Jiu-Jitsu and I did that for a while and then I ended up at the pit Hawaiian Kempo withdrawn Hackman and Chuck and the names of as well. Yep. Arroyo Grande in San Luis Obispo. Yeah, and then that's that my was actually Jake Shields that brought me to the pit. Really. Yeah, he showed up. So I was like the big guy at the gym and grappling right wrestle Wilden so I could go in and kind of smash a lot of the people and then this kind of awkward weird white kid comes in and just like map like mops the floor with my soul and I was like, who are you?


Where did you come from? And what? You like what is this is like well, it's like catch wrestling. You know, it's just kind of like Jiu-Jitsu and wrestling kind of put together, you know, and but you know, then we fight and I think I was 16 at this 15 15 16 this time. He said can we in San Luis Obispo? There's these other guys that do it the scan McGee and Scott Adams and Chuck Liddell and attend Antonio been away Liz Cruz Gomez and it's like Cool. I want to go there. So I went there and got my brains bashed in for forever. Yeah, that means an interesting character himself. He is he's quite a character. Yeah, he's a great coach though, especially back then he invested a lot and he was old school and I guys like Chuck and myself and we needed old school.


Now, the coaches can't do or say the things that John would say back then. And and I love John now, but you know, he was not a kind coach. He's still training Glover, right? Yeah, he's got glow and then Alex pereira's with them now as well, which I thought was very interesting that Court McGee is still in and out so easy. Yeah courts had some injuries, right? Yeah. Yeah. I think his whole career is kind of been like that. Yeah, there's a guy out. There was always on my radar of like I thought I might fight because when I went to Jackson's, you know clear break separation and then he's in the pit in Utah, right? Yeah, but he's gotta stay healthy.


He's in a he's one of those guys that almost died and came back because of drugs and there's a few of those guys that are almost unbreakable. They like they almost died and come back and then they become these insanely discipline people and he's one of those. Yeah, is that good though to almost die. No drug. I don't think it's good. I think whatever led him to drugs. He probably could have squash those demons with training. There but the problem with there's many obsessions and addictions that come from almost the same energy that could be applied to something that makes you incredibly successful.


It's these way your brain is fixated whether it's on gambling or whatever it is. Whatever these addictions are. They could ruin your life or you could decide you're going to be the baddest motherfucker that ever lived and it's the same. And of addictions, you know, I've talked to Tyson about this. I talked to a bunch of Fighters about this that have these addictive Tendencies, but those will Tendencies are also obsessive Tendencies, which can be applied to something that is ultimately positive like training. That's what I do. Yeah. I have a huge. I've never had any addiction to negative stuff, but I think if you look at my life from how I train how I shoot how I work.


However, my company's you're like this this guy's a Path with the the disciplined Regiment of literal pain and suffering that intentionally put my body through and that's to stay productive. And so it's all constructive. Yeah. I always joke that if I didn't do martial arts and fight and go into the military, we're all of those things were encouraged like yeah, we want you to fight, you know, we want you to kind of be a violent badass. I would be in prison God. Like for sure, probably a lot of people like that. Yeah. Yeah, a lot of people a lot of people that are in prison that I to this day feel like we could have got them when they were young and said Hey, listen.


Listen, this is the path you're on. Yeah, but this is this is a way better path. You can get on it's fucking exciting. Yeah, and it's going to feel good. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's painful it's hard so rewarding that so rewarding trying to talk and convince somebody like to buy into this way of life, you know, and I think like your hard work the all the things that you want on the far side of hard work and and getting somebody to believe that where they have to make all these kind of small decisions. Where am I waking up early? Am I not going to be drinking? Am I not going to be doing drugs? Am I going to be training? Am I going to all of these tiny little decisions start adding up and like the Titanic slowly turning the boat, you know, but had they started turning the boat earlier.


They went to struck an iceberg and they all went to died right but you have to start making all these incremental adjustments and like imagine with the Titanic would have been had it not truck though. Iceberg like a connection between two worlds the poverty being able to move to a new world and the rich Elite been commingling and like who knows what the world would been like had that boat not sunk and it would have only taken these small early adjustments to see the whole entire change of its course, but the belief right you're at the helm and you're telling me that's to start moving to moving the the boat and like I don't want to like I don't need to all the excuses are there but it is so rewarding to be on the far side of all that it's just people need to they need to know about these procrastination demons that haunt your mind and they will rob you of all possible success everything those still everything from you.


Yeah, and you like when people come to our courses The biggest thing that we're trying to impart that like I'm not going to in two and a half days. I'm not going to turn somebody into a great fighter. I'm not going to turn somebody into a great shooter in two and a half days. But what they're going to learn is they're going to learn their assets and their liabilities and they're going to learn about themself about what do they need to do that? We're going to put them on a course a direction a path all the things they need to do to positively change their life and it becomes this this all use addictive like this all-consuming. Passion to want to know that your family safe to not live in fear to know that you're healthy.


Like I've less body fat. I'm feeling kind of like a badass like one of foot with my wife a little bit more now. I'm having more sex. Now my energy is going up now. I'm sleeping better in the next days even better so I can train a little bit more. I can work a little bit more. I can shoot a little bit more and then like the next day. I'm even better and like just one percent incremental changes. Now two months removed you like, who is this person? You just lost 20 pounds of fat like you Got calluses on your hands. You don't have that fat baby chub on your face any more and more importantly. I see Life In Your Eyes where you showed up two months ago. And there's like this ghost skeleton of a human now, I see a person that's rad. Okay, I get to see this transformation of people. It's one of the favorite things about what I do.


Yeah. It's so hard for people that don't do it to understand that if you do push your body it gets stronger and you grow and then you literally feel better. I try to explain it to a friend of mine. I said, imagine if you have a race And the race car is 400 horsepower and a certain with tire and a certain kind of suspension. But literally you can make it have more horsepower and handle better. And why all you have to do is work. You just have to push it and the tires will widen and the suspension will toughen and it'll be more pliable around corners. The the engine will get stronger. The exhaust will sound better it'll be more rewarding to drive you can do this. You can do with your body like your body literally is in your race car.


Yes, and your mind your mind. Goes along with it, which is another thing that bums me out. We're really smart. People don't want to work out because they think it's like they think it's for Meatheads or they think it's it's a stupid egotistical pursued like no you literally are all connected your brain and your body are one total Human Condition. Yes, it's because you look if you're a an awesome pianist, right and you're really good at playing the piano. You have to understand that that's not just your fingers, right? That's your mind your mind. Is also making you play the piano well, guess what if you were in better cardiovascular shape? You probably could do that even better because in the whole system would work better everything would work better and this is the same with every DNS aspiring, you know, everything everything is going quicker young and guys like Rachmaninoff big huge powerful hands, I could play these big huge chords like his body conditioned to be able to do those things.


It wasn't like immediately. He had this one and a half octave reach right. He learned in his hands literally grew to be able to play chords. That if you and I go and play them right now, we have carpal tunnel in six months, you know, like there's his body adapted and evolved to be able to play like this. Don't don't don't don't don't don't don't don't like a so freaking cool. I love humans. I love humans to my friend campaigns. He does a bunch of ultra marathons and I love that guy. He's an awesome dude. Yeah, and he started out like is funny why I talked to him like it's like when I started running I deserve better run a mile and that's it. So someone saying like how the fuck does a one-run 40 miles I go. Will you start by running a mile?


Yeah, and you start eating an elephant. Yeah, you start and you just you keep in the next thing, you know, you can run three miles and you could do it at a comfortable pace and then six months later. You can run 6 miles at a comfortable pace and then six months after that. You can run a marathon at a comfortable pace and then six months after that. You can run an ultramarathon you can see he's got a you said six months though, like people want immediate early gratification, right? Like, how can I just hit a button or I just Watch a nap or pull up a YouTube video and teach me how to do that because it takes work. Yeah, that's the thing. Yeah to thing. So how do you convince somebody to do it? Because the this idea this cost to some Republic that we're in like it was possible because the individuals were strong self-sufficient and they believed in individual responsibility, right and they have fucking balls.


Yeah. They're coming another common unit powerful. Did I'ma fight a bear. Yeah, I start a republic start a whole new thing does another consult know without that individual being a freaking stud? Yeah, right and not this fat flagellant gelatin human sitting on the couch playing video games and none of these ideas are possible. If we continue down the the soft trajectory of wanting instant gratification and believing that were entitled to Anything we have to we have to believe that you got to be a badass for this to work.


There's so many people that are conditioned to instant gratification. And there's so many people that want to take a pill that's that's that's another problem with today. You know, you feel bad you feel bad. We need to take a pill or or go run for Miles. Yeah doing your brain does the same freaking thing that your pill just made your do but it happened naturally and you'll be healthier and you're going to produce more of it tomorrow. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, like I don't know a lot of really depressed frustrated sad healthy smart people who exercise a lot. Yeah, it's not mean I'm sure there's some I'm sure there are absolutely some mental imbalance is just like some people have liver disease, right and they don't even drink some people they get cancer and they didn't do anything wrong.


This is the body fucks up. Sometimes that also happens with your brain. It happens with hormones. It happens with the what you're bringing your brain's ability to produce dopamine, sir. Tone in sometimes it just doesn't work right now and that is a that is a real thing but more often than not that's not what's going on. Nope. Just go do the work go do the work. Yeah, I feel so good and everything. Like how much do you love eating your elk? I love it. It's not only does it taste fantastic right? Not only do you look at it. And remember every time I'm cooking whether like I had lasagna the other night. I took some welcome and Italian sausage little bit of pork fat bunch of Italian. Oregano and Thyme there were mixed into the Meat. So I made a lasagna with ground back strap and Italian sausage two nights ago.


But the like as I'm cooking and I'm remembering walking up this mountain and seen it two ridges away and be like, okay, where's the wind coming from? How am I going to buttonhook around this thing so that I can stay upwind of it and catch it in this next Ravine, you know, and like every single moment the smells it's all coming back to you and I sit down at the table got my family with me. We're going to eat this together. It's amazing. It's like magical it's hard for people to understand that I've never done it before but it is eating something that you've hunted and killed yourself as a different thing. It's a different thing really is. Yeah so fun now it's accessport. What a good place to do it. You fucking do it anywhere here.


There's so many ranches here. It's pretty much like this is not a public land so it can be a little bit differently 2% Yeah. What's this whole state which is kind of Bonkers. Yeah, but I mean, there's the government really supposed to be owning Our Land. Well, you just got all taxes on me. Yeah. Yeah. It was I'm not opposed to owning property and you can pay to hunt all these places. The most of these places are a lot of them. I should say our commercial hunting ranches and they're not unreasonable and you can go and for a small amount of money when you think about the amount of animal that you get I mean if you hundreds of pounds, yeah, especially pigs like you get some wild first of all wild pigs you've eaten wild pigs and I Can love them I think they're goddamn delicious.


I love them. You gotta get the right one. You gotta get the right way. Well, I've got I got lucky and the ones that I've hunted we've been at Tejon Ranch in California and they eat a lot of acorns. They were real thick with fat. Oh my God, they're so good. I shot one with John Dudley and we brined it and slow cooked it on the trigger. It was incredible. I love the trigger. Oh love it. So you cook. That's the thing. Yeah. I had this walk-in. I mean, it's Half the size of the studio there's walk in smoker and it had the eating L heating element and the smoke element and I had it kind of like insulated. It was like I can hang an entire rack of elk ribs in there, but I had to sit there 24/7 for however long I was going to sit there and smoke this and I just too much of a Justin Smoak levels and heat levels and and then it's like, oh now I can just put this thing in my and walk inside with my phone.


Check your asked me. Hey add add some more stuff in here. Yeah, I need more smoking like while to he's even better. I love when you do a recipe through the app the app actually navigates the cooking cycle changes temperature for you. But then at the end of the day, it's really just fire and wood. That's the beautiful thing. There's no chemicals. There's no gasps. There's it's just fire and wood. So it tastes like you cooked it over an open fire so good. It's fucking awesome and Wild game that way is the best. It's the best. Best I mean there's a reason why so many Hunters by trager's pellet grills any pellet grill, if you know betrayer pellet grills are the shit they're so good. Like I love how easy it makes life.


You know, like my my outdoor cook kitchens next to the pool. So I go throw that stuff in there and I'm like in the pool with the kids mine too. And it's just yeah, I'm not sitting over there wasting my whole entire day and my kids are pissed. You know, I like you better appreciate this brisket because I spent 14 hours on it, you know like that never happens. Like I put that in there and I forgot about it old school. Like when I watch the videos of Franklin's Franklin's Barbecue in Austin that dude, he uses old school, you know offset smokers with wood and throws the wooden with the logs. And obviously the result is fucking insanely delicious. I appreciate it, but I don't have time for that but this is full time job, you know, Aaron Franklin, I got it. That's amazing. Awesome doing that thing. I'll drive in and buy it when I need it, but I don't have the time to do that.


And I love looking at my app like, oh the meets at a hundred twenty degrees get ready to pull it. Yeah. You're getting close. It sends you in the little notification. Yeah. No, I love it. I love it and I can't get enough Wild game and I need to bring more out here. I didn't bring enough out here. I have added in commercial freezers some of it back home. So I literally might take a trip back home just to fill up some coolers and bring meat back. It's crazy shipping it with dry ice. It was I've just put in a Yeti. Yeah, it's frozen. It'll you could send it regular ground mail for five days. It'll get their fucking Frozen. That's why it's crazy how well those things keep temperature.


I put on either end a little cardboard vertical separator from the meat and then I pack dry ice in there and I just leave like an inch along the Top If I'm shipping stuff and then it just keeps it, you know, super freshest for how long how long will it last? The dry ice evaporates at the same whether regardless of temperature. So inside there that'll last for five days. Well, yeah. Yeah, it's it could be done. Yeah, you can ship it what you guys doing tomorrow 911. Well, the reason why I had you on here today is because this podcast can be released on 9/11. It's like there's no more appropriate person to have on 9/11. Then you we have a podcast tomorrow that we're doing a Skype one with the fellow from the UK.


The there are A more appropriate people than me, like any firefighter. That was their Ground Zero. Have you been to Ground Zero? No, man, you gotta go every American I think New York City is off my list for life. Now. That's yeah, that's a good point but being there and seeing kidding, by the way. If you live in New York relax, I'm coming back they do but to call me there. Yeah, they're still doing comedy there. You have to do it outside though in a fucking tent. Yeah, but don't people come by with microphones and scream at you. Yeah, that's not me. I know John how committed and I talked to this week. He called music. Hey, what would you do if you're at a restaurant and you're essentially ambushed by people screaming at you try and you know telling you to raise your raise your fist and like, you know one I'm not be there because I'd before I go places.


I'm making sure that it's safer to go there. You know, I'm not gonna be sitting at a restaurant where a protest is gonna be. Came through and I know there are targeting ones specifically to try to catch people and get the I got you a moment to is like, you know situational awareness. It's not I'm sitting here and I see some people congregating across the street. I'm going to wait and see what happens. Now. There's a lot of people I see cameras. I see megaphones. I'm gonna can still sit here and wait and see what happens. I got you like five six people wearing black hoodies masks, you know little redfish painted on their shoulders and like that dinner's done. We're out of here and we pack up and go. Yes, New York crazy crazy place but that that Memorial is I don't know what it is about that place.


Like you can feel I don't Souls like you can feel the pain there. I think that's real. I think you can my dad went to Gettysburg and my stepfather and he was there and he said I've never believed that there's a place we could feel sadness he goes, but it did you just feel that the people that died there. Yeah, feel it. It I mean palatable describable heaviness. Yeah, this is not like I'm like, I'm not a guy that you know, like they're so still no there but you can feel it and you like never forget right how quickly we forgot. Well they were trying to cancel the fucking putting up the lights.


Yeah, like why why would you do that? Have you seen the falling Man Documentary? So there's a photograph called the falling man? That it is. You can just Google falling man. And you see this guy and this anytime I need to know the reason why I'm going all over these places doing that's it. Dude. Fuck I can't look at it because it like, I mean it gets me. Okay. Let's talk about this dude for a second. He's sitting standing kneeling Lane on the floor of a shattered window and he's looking back and Inside and he's making the decision whether he's going to burn alive or he's going to jump to his death him and hundreds of others.


They're sitting there Americans looking inside of a building being like, okay, do I burn alive or do I jump to my death? And now that that video and that picture is so unnerving because he consciously is making the choice to Die the whole entire way down. You can see he's staying in like I'm going to faceplant into the asphalt. And all the way into the ground he's making that choice because he didn't want to burn alive. So like every time I'm sucking or suffering or frustrated if I've to go, you know do another mission that I'm of course I want to do all these sexy things all over the planet and but sometimes I don't get to get a usually that's the way the military Works don't get to pick and I think about that guy and I think about the three thousand Americans that were standing there and be faced with that choice of am I going to burn alive?


Am I going to jump to my death because insurgents wanting to you know, radical fundamentals wanted to knit destroy the idea that we stood for capitalism American Freedom here with $500,000 and box cutters these untrained assholes. We're able to bring down the largest super power on the planet. I think that's what asymmetrical Warfare is like a symmetrical is is something that's not aligned with everything else and warfare. in these Under asymmetric Warfare is kind of halves not fighting The Haves and doing it in ways that nobody's ever done it before it was it was genius and horrible that this small group of untrained guys with box cutters did but how many trillions of dollars and we spent in this war 17 billion dollars in damage just in that one day 3,000 American lives More Alive since Pearl Harbor like we went to war the Japanese and dropped two atomic bombs for that.


We're so short. with what we remember This this current Society is generation is fast influx of information. Like I'm and I want to never forget that man's face and do we know who he was? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They think they're like 90% there was another couple that did as well there. There's like a few dozen. Yeah, they got the black girl on the right or maybe she's white and covered in soot. But she's literally looking down trying to get a breath of fresh breath of air before she either suffocates or burns alive, and then she jumps.


I never again. We say never forget and never again. Like how do we stop that? And that is the constant? Unrelenting fight against these fanatic ideas and it's not just there are countless types of revolutionaries and insurgents like ones that do it for religious reasons ones to push out foreign powers ones because of the the Hutu and Tutsi like that's just ethnic but they're all the same kind of formula of we're not happy about something. So we're going to do something horrific to try Change asymmetric Warfare to try to change the shape of something and that fight against this.


These extreme outliers has to be one that we're committed to all the time. Otherwise that will happen again. Might be a train in might be a bus. You know, it might be a dirty bomb. Yeah, like thank God Boston probably the next worst thing that's happened since then which was a couple of idiots with pressure cookers because we have been so aggressive not just here but also abroad ensuring that this doesn't happen. It's weird right now. You know, I think the last time I was here I was telling you how bad it is in Special Operations Special Forces specifically in recruiting like we are hurting for people in the right people and all the people that have been coming in they came in to fight this war but now we have kids in basic training that weren't alive when 9/11 happened.


I volunteered on 9/11 because of this but now we have I don't even know how many I'm calling them kids. They're Heroes that they're there selflessly serving their country. But we're leaving Iraq. We're leaving Afghanistan II had a diploma next year that looks like it's going to get tanked because Trump is pulling back our forces from these places for us to do other things and those other things are Counterinsurgency, its foreign internal defense its Security Forces assistance its joint combine exercises for training and like while I want to go put on my body armor and have a beer and go look sexy and go do all these things. Those are the important jobs that we have to do in the coming in the coming years to make sure this doesn't happen again, right if we're in Afghanistan in 1999 with a present trying to help The Afghani government.


Have a constitutional republic or a government in a way would have this happened. Maybe not. I don't know but probably not the same reason why we're all over Africa same reason why we still have presence in NATO. It's for the same reason that we're present in the Philippines. It's trying to fight these radical ideas so that security and stability provides an area for people to live freely. However, they want to we're not telling anybody how to live right Philippines. African this year and as urea Mauritania Burkina Faso, you guys do your things whatever that thing is, we're here to help you do it, but it's going to be done safely to provide stability and security.


So I never want to see that again. Like do you want to see an American me? Like I'm not gonna see my kids, but I want to burn alive. So I'm gonna jump Fuck you, and your extremist ideas. I'm gonna find you and we're going to fight you till the day we die. But we have to be vigilant about it. When you hear people talk about defunding the military when you hear people talk about pulling troops out of other countries and a non-interventionist foreign policy. But you know what, you know, yeah, and you know why this stuff has to be done. How do you react to that it's ignorance. I mean first it's pity. It's like I feel bad for them.


I'll go to a country in West Africa and I'll go back two years later and I will see the school that I helped build or was providing training for the people that are going to be protecting it and that's cool still functioning and they've had two years of people graduating from that school. And now I go to what was like this Podunk Village and people are sitting there reading a book. Look like you can read it. Yeah, I learned how to read last year, but this is so cool. You know like you have freshwater. How did you have fresh water? Like well, we learned how to read and then we started reading these books and like we actually do natural filtration through the soil and and we're also doing this tiered irrigation like check out our crops.


Holy crap. You have crops here. You'd have crops here two years ago like into yeah in two years. I'm Seeing this transformation of people so every single radical group from Isis Al-Qaeda Taliban farc to antifa. They go and Target the poor and uneducated. That's that's who they recruit from and they take these ideas they plant seeds and they plant seeds through like you're super poor your daughter's going to get married. I'm going to come in as the bad guy. Isis member, and I'm going to pay for your daughter's wedding and and the endowment I'ma Do it all and that we like you're indebted to me and your wife and her new husband are kind of like appreciative to me.


But now I have a hook in you and I can and it doesn't take a lot of money to pay for a wedding in Somalia. So that there's the population there's the poverty and there's the opportunity for them to plant these seeds of fanatic Ridiculousness. And that's what they do is so when I see somebody that's like a we need to pull everybody back. Yeah in in Wars Iraq and Afghanistan, we have created stability there and I don't know what we can never govern Afghanistan like they can't that's just the way that the people are and it's kind of cool and it's kind of also frightening because there's so nomadic.


Yeah, it's been tribals forever. I mean you go back to gank is gone, you know, like they've been insurgents from con to to the British to the Russians to them the British again to French to then the Russians again then to us like they've just been doing this thing for as long as they've been in existence. So just leave them be right we can still be there with the government like hand-in-hand advise and assist in a company like how to do things but we don't physically need to be there fighting Wars all the time and that's kind of what we're doing right? We're phasing back our physical direct action presence.


But it's somebody say that we need to pull everybody in. We only need to protect our own borders and let's just be present here. It's super naive and it's super ignorant because this is the result of us not being outside of our own borders the idea of policing the world doesn't sit. Well with people though. You don't have to think the idea the world. That's not what we're doing. So security Force Assistance or joint combined exercise for training or for internal defense. That is I am not walking around being like hey you and Urgent you get back in that building. I'm with like by with and through working with the local government by their side with them with their mission and their intent through their own purpose and ideas.


I understand that but how do you get that message to people that do think that it's policing the world that do think that we should mind our own business and take that Ron Paul approach and pull the troops back and take care of our own and not worry about other countries. I mean I wish I could take people with me to show them. Have you ever listen to Ron Paul? Talk about these? Yeah. Yeah for sure. I think the easy answer and I never liked easy answers is that this hasn't happened 911 hasn't happened again, even though they have we know that they have tried ten twenty thirty thousand times. They've tried to do this again in every single way and whether it's a terrorist training camp where we got them, whether it's the new Isis leader, whether it's the new Al-Qaeda leader, whether it's the next Iranian, you know Secret Service that's funding groups and terrorists.


Nations all over the planet. We got him, you know, like we have been constant and Vigilant and finding them and stopping them and we have to otherwise it. How is it how is this not happen again? Are there fewer extremists? Oh We have stopped them through our actions. If we did not do anything. This would happen again. How much of an effect does it have in who's President? Oh man a lot. Look, what was the difference between Obama and Trump? I'll just use ammo as an example a suit like again. Not an easy. I'm just trying to draw you know parallels.


That people can wrap their heads around if I'm going to forecast how much ammo I need for training. I'm going to find out what my mission is. I'm going to set up kind of like the training calendar of all the events that we're going to do flat ranges CQB long-distance sniper stuff mounted training and then that forecasts how much ammo I need and then I go and I asked for that ammo and I would get like I'd be allowed to ask for about a third then during Obama of what I was allowed to ask for with bush or now Trump. 1/3 1/3. Wow. Yeah is your rationalization for that?


It's just like Funding has been able to buy cool drones or new guns or different Optics like the funding is there or the funding is not there and if like while the big department defense military machine may not be the most efficient thing when it goes down to the individual like it comes down to me being like I can have this gun or I can't I can't have this opticore. I can't have to use this old rifle. It's been shot by 20 soldiers before me or I get a new one and and it's black and white. It's like dollars and cents.


Like I have nine dollars under this guy or I have three dollars into this guy. So when you left fighting and went back into the military was one of the reasons you did that because Trump was in office and then there was more funding. Yes. I don't like losing at anything and going into a fight that you are not prepared to win is a pretty bad idea and knowing you like I'll use Kelvin Gastelum as an example supposed to fight Rashad Evans New Year's Eve or at Madison Square Gardens in November and fight fell through medical things.


And I mean by the time I get to the Kelvin Gastelum of I've cut weight two different times now my ballooned up to 220 back down to 185 to 220. Now. I'm cutting weight back to 185 again and now a five-month fight Camp. I'm like walking out to the Octagon tired. Like I just warmed up in the back with Brandon and Greg and I'm like, that's a toilet trained. Yeah, but too bad feeling to walk into a fight not in a position to fight and we're when Trump was elected. We were 100% still at War Isis was thriving right all the places. I went and fought in Afghanistan.


We're now controlled by ISIS like do you know bad that sucks to look at all the places where I remember friends getting hurt or you know, like Jocko the places that he went. But those were occupied by ISIS physically octopi. Then he lost countless friends Fallujah and ramadi sadr City all this place all in the Syrian border controlled by ISIS land that we controlled and fought and then lost And then thinking about like I have to go back in here and do this again, but I have the third third amount of the resources to do it. That sucks. Or knowing that okay. Now I'm going to have a guy that is going to back me with the pocketbook to go and win not that was the the choice for me was.


I just want to win I don't want 911 to happen again and that's hard to stop when you're giving when you're creating vacuums for evil to fill and how much of an impact has it have has it had having Trump as president and making those decisions to fund the military better in terms of success overseas. I mean, we should mashed Isis in a year. One year, they Rose for three and and started gaining ground the Isis caliphate into all of the Middle East like they were popping up yet ice people swearing allegiance to Isis in Africa, you know like a Boko Haram has like yeah.


We're Isis now what you kidding me and that cancer is plake spreading all over the world because we weren't aggressively With vigilance fighting those ideas then you know November roll around 2016 and it was by at February of 2017. It was like go it was off. Yeah, we're literally smashing them every single opportunity dropping the biggest bomb, you know and Taliban the JDM or the was it the Moab? Yeah. That's pretty cool. I just dropped the pill the bomb.


Next to the size of the nuclear weapon. That's that's awesome. And this is all because of trump getting into office and funding the military. Yeah. So the president comes out with this National strategic plan and that goes to a bunch of different things from Department of Defense to Department of State and every single one of these look to that idea that document as to how they're going to operate and then you have the appointees to those Positions like Mattis, for example where then he interprets what the intent is from like the executive plan. And then for Department of Defense, how are we going to fulfill that and then that goes to all of the regional commanders and to all the Special Operations unit and then missions are built off of fulfilling these ideas and those ideas were smash Isis remove radical terrorists off the planet and provide security and stability.


With all of our partners and then grow who are partners are so I can Africa. If you went back five six years, you would have three or four or five countries that were part of this like this group of regional Africans wanting to be free right? Like they don't want Boko Haram or Al Qaeda or Isis coming in and telling them what to do. They want a free constitutional rule. Government, so we started helping now. There's like a dozen of those countries that are part of this group and they're all doing they're all doing the work and it's amazing.


It's amazing to see what happens in just a couple of years in any one of these countries when they start doing the work. It's no different than a person writes like but it's a group of people and they're all believing in these ideas of freedom of Education of prosperity and we're just creating Opportunity for those to be realized this is not a message that gets out enough what you're saying right now about the importance of funding the military about all the positive aspects of these operations and about how squashing these fundamentalist terrorist groups can lead to democracy and all these places and can lead to flourishing schools and growth of these individual areas.


Yeah. This is not a message that gets out enough. No, I mean that's by Design. A little bit I think. You know half the country doesn't want the other half to look good and we definitely know that are all of our enemies foreign enemies are 100% participating right now is a move towards November in delegitimizing what this country stands for in the process of our elections and what we're allowed to do successfully overseas. So like, you know from Russia to China like they're in the business of hurting America and there. Not only here like making our election seem unfair or broken but also abroad where they're trying to like every place that we are they are as well and they are trying to do the opposite of we--what.


We like they're there they want radicals. They want broken they want because every little bit that they do is more that we have to fight against what I said that an insert. In C is cheap and a counter Insurgency is expensive, but we're fighting counter-insurgency all over the planet as we move towards the elections with Portland fire and off Seattle Fire and off like I think would be very naive for us not to think that China and Russia are negatively participating if you look at 2016 with Hillary and Trump or the Russians involved. Yeah, yeah for sure they're there.


Stoking the fires of hate on both sides and it didn't matter who won like they didn't want Trump to win. They didn't need Hillary to win. They just need the process to look broken. They just have to make us look bad. It doesn't matter to them who wins and coming to Biden and trump. It doesn't matter who wins it matters that they do legitimize the process of a fair election and a constitutional republic. It's really easy to do. I'm going to use are you have a birthday coming up you are going to turn 60 happy birthday. You look great for being 60 Joe and you're going to have a party to celebrate this and you're going to have all your friends over.


You know, you got some gay guys. You got some black guys. You got some Mexicans you got your pretty balanced person with lots of different friends from lots of different cultures not but they're all going to be in the same room right got this big huge Melting Pot of your party. Cool. Gonna be a red party you got a bar you kind of rented this cool place as if you know some few bathrooms has this nice nice balcony this beautiful statue and there's like this ice sculpture. That's some great drinks on it and the punch is underneath it. I don't want you have a good party. I'm your Insurgent. I don't like you. I don't like your ideas. I don't like this idea of everybody being able to co-mingle.


So I'm going to go I'm going to ruin your party. I had a friend of a friend that kind of got me in. So how hard is it for me to ruin your party super easy, right? I could go piss in the punch. I could go find that gig. I used some homophobic slurs could find that Muslim over in the corner and you know, tell him that like the pillows that dumbest group on the planet. Israel should own everything and that Muslims are ignorant multi wife assholes all of its untrue. It doesn't matter if I believe it. I'm just there to piss people off. I'm gonna go to those two bathrooms. I'm gonna go give you an upper decker. Let me go poop in the top of two of those toilets. Well, that's disgusting right stinks. Maybe I'm gonna go chip away at the that little beautiful sculpture.


So when somebody goes to scoop the their first punch the whole thing to pull it topples over so easy and so cheap Or me to ruin everything about your day. That's what they're trying to do an election right there. Just trying to erode the process and ruin it and it costs them nothing to go and piss off every single group The far-right the far-left. They just want people angry and the process is so simple now with Twitter and Instagram and Facebook right these step these these massive Bots that can go and like things and create and they play this long game where they just start planting seeds of distrust and and They're spending money to make antifa mad.


They're spending money to make the Boogaloo Bros look mad and they want everybody to be mad at everybody moving into November. So then the process the election is jacked but your party so you do have an option. This is the Catch-22 of how difficult it is as a leader to stop it. Like I could hire security guards. I could put a guard at the front. I could have put a guard by the punch. I could put a guard. Every bathroom I could check all the IDS of everybody coming in. I could have like a exact list of people that are allowed to attend, but now I just ruined you just ruined your own party because you're trying to provide security and stability and you put all of that in there and but now your party sucks right like I can't get a drink.


I'm only allowed one drink and nobody's allowed to talk to each other and nobody's allowed to hang out. Everybody has to be segregated and separate so you ruined your own party. So in either case you give me Freedom of movement the American way and I'm going to ruin it or you try to come in too heavy-handed and then you look like a dictator, you know, you'll look like Hitler himself. So, how do you how do you have a good party? It's hard. That's where we're at right now. They're literally doing that with with every way they can it's frightening. So this idea that Russia just wants Trump to win. It's horseshit. Yeah, they don't care. They just need the process to look bad.


So wait, we have a constitutional republic, right? What do they have? But dictatorship. Yeah, absolutely so they don't need. A friend. They just need the process the idea of America to look broken. That's what that success to them. If I can say this with such absolute nothing like conviction because this is what we do. This is what we do. This is what we go overseas and do like we have specific groups that are doing this exact thing to make them look bad, but they're doing it to us and because America is so free. It's so much easier to do here.


like how hard is it for me to go to Russia and or land in China and go and start planting seeds of discontent pretty freakin hard right like here, it's not hmm so hard The fight this so because of the fact that we have freedom because the fact that we have these Democratic elections because the fact that we have the ability to express ourselves and communicate freely online, which they don't really have a neither one of those countries. There's severe repercussions for criticizing the government in China severe and same thing about Russia. So because we have his freedom over here, they participate. Yeah, and the way they participate is through the internet research agency, and I had a woman on name Grenada.


Just us who extensively researched this and was talking about how spectacular this operation was and what they would do. They literally organized a protest exes meet up across the street from a pro-muslim meet up and they said it up they set it up that way. Yeah a friend who's very well versed online found this antifa rage this thing against white rage online and they trace the IP back to Russia. Yeah. Like this is wild this is wild shit. Like there's not wild though. It's like America what America wake up your eyes because wake up and open your eyes to this is happening where how naive is it for us?


Not to think that our enemies are trying to negatively affect what is happening here, right because this is the place where you can negatively affect it in the way that they can do it here which is different than the way you could affect anything in Russia or China because of the fact that we have this freedom of expression. They don't they don't need somebody to win. They just have to make us look bad. This is where our media has failed us because our media takes this horrible partisan position whether you're on the left or the right, they only want to look at the things that show that the left or the right depending on who your enemy is is fucking up and how China or Russia whoever whoever you deem the player that's the key player is influencing our elections because they want this person to win.


So if you love America, you will vote against Trump because the Russians want Trump to win. This is this is the fucking narrative that keeps getting spit out at us and it's not it doesn't sit well with me and I'm glad you're explaining it the way you're explaining it because partisanship and this this a built-in ability to look at things objectively is really fucking us up. Yeah. It's really bad and these motherfuckers that are running the media. There's a reason why people aren't paying attention anymore. There's a reason there's a reason why those those sources are not trusted. It divided is perfectly divided. Like if if I were in China or in Moscow as like exactly what kind of environment do I want so I could negatively affect an election.


You're looking at it right. Now. I'm going to stoke the fires of the 1% on the right. I'm going to stoke the fires of the 1% of the left and I'm just going to want them. So angry I've created all these different accounts that have thousands of followers. They're fake. The followers are Bots and the people that are saying that those are real people that speak perfect English and they are in there in those groups. Just planting hate. So people just get madder and madder and madder here. We look at like black lives matter. I don't think there's a single American that that's going to be like no black lives don't matter why there might be one but screw that racist, right so few and so irrelevant such a minor position. Yeah, like like the is their solidarity for sure like, What are the solutions the things being talked about?


Not really, not really. Why is that like I'm spending probably half of my waking hours right now developing a way to be able to train police officers and get something into every single Police Department said they can like, you know, unconscious bias training about how to deescalate understanding different cultures, right if I'm walking down the street and I see a key seek and I'm like, it was just a Muslim. I have to go here and fight this guy that guy comes in a little bit closer because that's part of their culture. It's also part of their culture. They have a knife. And I don't know any of this and I just misunderstood who this person is and his religion and his ethnicity and now I have the super bad interaction because this guy stepped into my space and all could that could have been trained out I could have taught somebody those things and with everybody being so stoked on getting angry and finding out the problems.


Nobody's talking about Solutions. And how do we how do we if there's a problem in law enforcement and there is like, how do we fix that? Can we talk about that instead of trying to find the next Port Uber driver that gets lost and immediately calling him a racist or or finding the next antifa guy that is really just poor lost. His job has been living in his mom's basement and just need something to do and let's give them something to do and that's like make a positive impact that is a real part of what's going on too. Yeah. It's a real part of what's going on if people don't feel like they belong and when there's a movement going On if you jump on the you see that guy who shot the pro Trump supporter in Portland.


Yeah, and you see the interview with him afterwards. Yeah, the interview is classic you listen to him interviewed. He's a lost guy a lost weird social outcast who found a home and then is soaking up all this attention that he got for shooting a trump supporter. He's claiming was out there trying to kill a friend of his of color that was his description of it and the police show up. Yeah, and he tries to shoot them. Yeah. He's just a Lost person. Yeah a violent lost person. I mean I somebody with a lot with no purpose right is a dangerous thing. Especially one who doesn't understand the consequences of their actions. it my brother's a sheriff Nick in California and the things that he has to do in a day, you know, the number of people and interactions that he has to have that he has had in his career and every single time.


Is it going to be this antifa guy that just shot somebody and in Monterey there was actually some antifa guys had thrown some pipe bombs in Oakland and then drove into Monterey County and set off some more pipe bombs shot a couple more cops and this kind of got buried in the news, but my brother was one of the guys that showed up there and they have to deal with that like a radical domestic terrorists and they also have to show up when a husband and wife are having a dispute they have to walk up to every single car as if that person is going to kill them. That person might be a DUI that person may not want to if they have broken the law not want to get out of the car.


You're gonna make me on the car like it is the hardest job in the world. They're under trained they're underfunded and but they are the necessary security for us to prosper and be successful and my brothers the most selfless incredible person as as most of the guys and I trained with a ton of law enforcement and nobody they're not perfect. Nobody is no human is but you can Can't train Perfection, but you can train bad out of people and that's one of the many reasons why I think training so Paramount and you know to the election and people are always focusing on the bad like you got to find Solutions if you're if you're mad and you believe in Black lives matter, what is your solution?


All right, if you're if you think the cops have a problem like I'm trying to find I found a solution right we're creating this this virtual reality headset that we're going to be able to put into every single Police Department with they'll be able to listen to and interact with different ethnicities that are consistent with the populations that they work in the like be able to identify unconscious bias. Like I'm pretty aware of the biases that I have because I look through the lens of my life through pretty jaded glasses, right the I've gone and done and seen but there's no way that I'm aware of all of them.


But there are ways that you can train that out of people and that you can show them and explore we have like some of the best brightest Minds phds law enforcement trainers that are designing these things that we can like put secular theories. My partner in this we can take these things and send to every single long before law enforcement department and train people about how to interact and when you're a hammer And everything looks like a nail and you're going to all of these different interactions with like is this guy going to shoot me? It's hard because he might but he also might be having a bad day and he didn't know how to deescalate that and but you also have to be able to enforce the law and that's the one of the hardest things right now.


And I know that Chinese and the Russians are loving the fact that the we are questioning do laws really matter. Can we just let things go can we just tear down statues? Can you just walk out in the middle of an interstate and stop traffic because you believe you have the right to do that. No, you can't do that. Like the rule of law. Is there not just for you but it's for us if you believe in the collective, then you have to believe that those laws are there for our good now, we have to make sure we elect good guys that put in good laws, but like if you just Don't believe that it matters and you can go and you can write and you can Loot and it's just property like you can burn that building down.


It's just property lives are more appropriate important than property but there are people's lives that are attached to that property. It might be how they make their money and might be where they live like watching antifa throw those Molotov cocktails while they were kids sleeping upstairs in the apartment building like shame on you you're being played right now, not only that but what you said earlier if you do destroy that property, Understand the lives that are going to be affected because that Community is going to be entrenched in poverty for Generations. You're not doing good. You're harming stop harming, you know start doing good find find like as we're on 9/11 the time may be the last time that we were United as a country where we're like no never again.


We can do that now, we really can I believe in the American Spirit like they this Petty immature Hate that people have against other people, but they're not other people there other Americans that believe in the same thing as you and that want the same thing as you they might have a different way of going about it. I get in there pert and perspective but like we're we all bleed red, you know, we all believe in the same thing. We all want the same thing and just finding out how to get there. I wonder what can be done to decouple us from the influence of social media in terms of like it is no way you Stop as of right now.


There's no way you can stop trolls. There's no way you can stop things like the internet research agency in Russia or all these different online groups that are just completely created just to fuck with people. There's no way we could stop that now. Nope, if we could we'd be better for it. Yes, we'd be better for it. We figure out what is actually happening if we can clearly identify the source of all these different things and let people know but people wouldn't even believe it right now. People are so jaded. And right now if you said hey, this is a Russian troll people like no, it's not you just work for Trump. Yeah, I know what's going on here. You're not going to trick me ma. My buddy Shane and I were talking about gaslighting this morning and he flew he and his buddies flew their helicopters over the Trump parade that just happened here in Austin thousands of boats went out there and like a few boat sunk and they're like one guy rented a boat and he forgot to put a plug in there and One of them is like a really crappy fishing boat.


That should have been on the water and then one guy bought a brand new boat didn't even know how to operate it in pork stock is boat but chains like flying around he sees everything. You know, there are there Robinson's 44 there are doing these cool V flights and you know gas lighting is telling somebody something that's not true. They're seen it with their eyes, but they're hearing that it's not real right that the original play Gaslight was this guy making his wife be crazy here to adjust the he would be able to adjust the wick on his Gaslight so would get darker in there and speak. His it darker in here. She's like no, it's this what's wrong with you.


Are you crazy? What's so we're in a time where people are telling us. What we're supposed to be seen but that's not what we're seeing. So I have this conflict of my supposed to believe what I'm seeing right here, but we're being gas lit by that wrong information that's being curated in our hands in our phones and uh, no and on our TVs. So the Lake Travis thing in reality, there's hundreds of both thousands thousands of boats that are supporting Trump three sunk, but the narrative you hearing in the media, there's like this catastrophe to death. That wasn't there. I was working but my best friend is flying around in helicopters, and he sees the whole time.


He his videos of everybody people are crazy on boat sometimes but you know, he literally sees the whole entire Lake from a bird's eye view and he has photos of the boats the boats the few that got were being towed in and he's like I had those were the crappiest like I don't even know how those things are on the water, but there's people that want to Dissipate and but what is this huge half the boat sunk. There's 20 underwater. There's this this disaster of an event seems like that's a thousands of boats with you know, titties being shown and people dancing and Trump flags and Am I being gas-lit?


You know, he's asking this like that. This is the definition of it is what your some amazing The Narrative was the three failures, but if we take that as the micro and blow that up to the macro of that happens in absolutely everything the shooting here in Austin, right we have what happened and then we have what we're told right on both sides. I don't even I don't think you could take the final version of these two stories and be like, this is the same the same situation the there's no Possible way that these two stories that went to the right and went to the left that I'm now trying to cooperate could could could have happened in the same situation, but that's how far the lies or the partial truths go.


So, how do you fix that? I think the only way to fix that is some kind of technology that allows you to accurately read exactly what's going on. That doesn't exist right now there would there might be Something on the horizon that there is like some neural link type deal where they're working on the ability to bypass this the like the right now the connection between human beings and information is you read it or you see it, but you don't really know what it is. You know, you're reading it. You're seeing it when confirmation not reading it's going from the person that is getting it to a thing. And then that thing is controlling what the next group CEO. Yes. Yes. That's a huge problem. Yes. Like I don't want my information curated.


I just wanted Mission, right and let me as a rational rational reasonable person be able to figure out that is the part of the problem. Right? The problem is you can't trust whoever there's not there's not an unbiased source is not an unbiased uncanny and every source is also a corporation. They're all connected to the machine and some really deep and crazy way. The tentacles Run Deep every whether it's CNN or Fox News or 100 Noaa n or whatever the fuck it is. Yeah, whatever news source of MSNBC CBS ABC NBC, they're all giant corporations. They all have huge political Investments and they're going to give you some some super distorted version of what's actually that note.


There's not one person who will sit down those not there's no Walter Cronkite no on. Television there's a few that are online you can get a bunch online. And that's one of the reasons why online news journalism is flourishing. And so many people are turning to these people that are online. Yeah. But they're also flawed because they're they're human and they have their own biases. Sure. Yeah, Andy, no, I follow him on Twitter. He's he's been on the podcast. Yes. Yeah, pretty pretty pretty passionate guy. Now, I guess he was assaulted by and aoife. Yeah hit him with like some cement milkshake or something. Yeah, and maybe the worst mistake they made because they ignited what was just kind of an independent journalist.


Now, he's like, nope. I'm not a Tifa you guys like beat me up damaged my brain and you know, but His journalism on antifa albeit trying to be as accurate as possible. We know he has bias because he doesn't like them. Yeah because they hit him in the head, you know, they'd beat him. They threw cement milkshakes at him. So even somebody that has trying to do the right thing. It's in perfect because with that person comes bias, like how do we just get information? Yeah, again, I really think that we're so limited because of the distribution methods that we have right now for getting out information allow for biases.


Yeah, you know, and I don't I don't know what the future has in store. But I think that we're going to come to a time in the not so distant future where you're going to be able to know exactly what's real. And what's not real. Yeah. I hope so so cool. Yeah. I think it's gonna be a lot of resistance against it too. We're going to find out a lot of people are full of Yeah, how cool would that be if you know like we have the fact Checker which is like the biggest bullshit ever as a politicians talking. It's like fact check in. The person fact checking is the most bias Furthest Thing from a jack objective factors that you can possibly get is like but you're checking the facts. What if at as that person was talking real time like this is true.


Here's like this the truth not Wikipedia statistics. Not like Google also curated statistics not like information driven from whatever news corporation, but just like the real data was next to that person as we're doing the next debate if a debate happens, that'd be cool. Oh, there's nothing is going to happen. How can you have a debate Biden's not going to do it? I don't think you can I don't think you can stand there for that long and last I don't even know what his ideas are. But that's the point of the debate right is is for me to learn about somebody's platform. Well, you know at this point he's doing well by not talking that's not doing well hurts them.


No, I don't I don't I don't imagine I would never allow him. If I was in the DNC I be like, there's no way you're debating Trump's going to destroy him. But that doesn't matter because the ideas are the thing that we're voting on, but it doesn't matter because people want to see who can hang in a debate and they don't want to vote for a loser. So if the guy gets up there and falls apart in the debate and start stumbling his words, it starts flopping and forgetting what he was talking about like Biden's done on multiple occasions. A lot of people are not going to vote swear. I thought they have a scheduled debate in a couple of weeks talking about that. That's usually where I learn about somebody.


Yeah. Yeah, they're not trying to learn and trying to win. I don't know about especially like I love it when local politicians to debates because those are like the Holds Barred truth attacks, you know, like well, I know you took money from this Auto Park Place, you know, and like this guy's like well, I know you're getting money from you know better or Rourke and you're like, this is awesome. You know, like I'm learning so much right now that there's no way I would have learned and they do end. Suck it. I mean we kind of have an idea about Trump's policies. But how do we learn about Biden's policies? Yeah. I don't know. I think they just I think Biden at this point just wants to win. I think the best way they think to win is to keep him from talking too much.


If I really had to guess like the only Kamala Harris is on doing a lot of different interviews and talking. What are you laughing at? There's I'm trying to look up to see what the new information about the bases in. This is the story. I found Trump's Burns traditional debate prep with first Faceoff less than three days three weeks. What was I saying suppose that that's supposed to be one in about three weeks. But right now we just not have a single mock debate and say does it need to President Trump is not held a single mock debate session has no plans to Stage a formal practice round as he readies for his first faceoff with Joe Biden less than three weeks according to multiple people familiar with the discussions. The president has dismissed a typical debate preparations. He participated in four years ago joking to AIDS and allies that he's been preparing for debate since he was born.


This is this is what happens to Fighters and they get their ass kicked his ability to fight back in a polite. In real time, he's argued isn't something you have to practice that's yeah, maybe instead Trump has so far chosen to prepare through informal discussions with key allies and with briefings from Top officials in his administration on various topics that will likely come up like or that are likely to come up. These people said, can you would you do debate? What I yeah, if like another problem I have with if I had to do a debate. No, not not you debating somebody I prepare like a mother. I know you would you'd be fun to watch but you be the control mechanism to the candidates like a Biden Trump debate with Joe Rogan hosting your questions.


I would want that. First of all, I'd want no one else in the room. Just the three of us camera so we can record with the truth. Yeah, just the three of us and you would have to stream it live. So no one can edit it and I would want them in there for hours and ideas. We could hear what they actually believe in what they're going to do who they're going to appoint what judges are going to be coming in what policies from gun control to yes all of it. Yes take it. Why can't we have that we should have that this is 2020. We have the ability to have that this is we're not talking about In 79 we're talking about 2020 if they wanted to do that. They both wanted to come here in Austin sit down and have a debate. I would 100% do it my God, I would 100% do it the amazing.


It would be the best way to find out but I don't think that Biden can handle it. I think Biden is like I think he's I mean people get mad at me for saying this. I think there's something wrong and I don't think there's something wrong because I'm guessing or because I'm pro-trump. I've seen him fall apart. I think I've seen him study talking. He's had multiple brain surgeries. This is this is is him saying I sent you that thing yesterday, right? I have a plate with this. This is something I mean, I'm not trying to be biased in any way shape or form. I'm a Bernie Sanders supporter. Yeah, I I just want to be a manager Keith gabbard. So that would be yeah do a commander chief. I told see ya love me Tulsi Jocko a hundred percent that I'd be a fun Jocko run for president.


Just the beginning of it. Just the beginning of it. He starts talking about his brain surgery. The only Uncharted person totally Uncharted portion of the universe is the brain. you know I had as we used to say in the Senate excuse the point of personal privilege here. I had to cranially aneurysms and they literally had to take the top of my head off. I mean they take a saw and they cut your head off and and go in to find the artery that is one was leaking the other that hadn't before it bursts as this those of your Doc's know there's a every procession every profession has their sick jokes the joke among Bond oxes.


How do you know someone said an annular it cranial aneurysm on the autopsy? Table only 20% of the people have it even get to the table. Well, one of the fascinating things is the second operation after the first one which was a bleed and they gave me a relatively low chance of surviving. I remember going down the dock asking the dock and weary, you know, you're counting the ceiling tiles and you're heading to the operating room you a lot of you been there and I said doc, what are my chances to Great neurosurgeons and I'll never forget I will not mention his name. He's one of the leading neurosurgeon in the in the world. He said Senator for mortality or morbidity?


I'm thinking I swear to God we're good. Now. This is not a knock on this guy. I'm happy he's alive, but that this is what we're talking about. We're talking about someone who these are legit issues. This is not he's gonna be sitting in a briefing room when a bunch of people from the Pentagon walk in and say we have found the number one Terrorist on the planet. What do you want us to do? And that guy has to make a choice and this is by the way when he was vice president. This is this is quite a while ago was this film so whoo, the keeping something in the only thing that comes from isolation is a Unabomber like there's nothing good that you can take a candidate and stick them in a basement and hide him there when he is going to have to be in front of 7 billion people and be their representative and both foreign and domestic about how we're going to be operating and if that scares me, it's weird.


It's I know there's other That could run for president. I just don't understand why they chose him and why they work so hard to make sure that he's the guy. Yeah, it's it's weird that the Democrats chose that do you think we're going to have but regardless of who wins. Do you think we're going to have a fair election? I hope so. I don't know. I'm not informed enough to make a you know, a state you think here we are in September. We have September October and then we have the election. Yeah, it's pretty quit super quick. November third is around the corner. Corner, I argue that right now people are trying to negatively affect our election for sure and we kind of have to be aware of that.


So the next time that you pick up your phone and you're like do you want to fry this guy, you know at white privilege. Twitter handle I'm going to come and get you like that that person just wants you to do exactly what you're doing, which is be mad. There's a plot probably high probability that there's a lot of that going on and that it's just feeding the Flames of hey, yeah, and it's even worse because we've had this stupid pandemic that is locked people into the echo chamber of their own idea and you can also set a lot worse by the way Trump behaves in the way. He communicates. Yeah, this this polarizing way that got him famous, you know, you're fired and fuck you and get out of here. And all this this way that he's become famous.


It doesn't suit someone to be the commander-in-chief. So all these people to say that he's not presidential. He's not he doesn't act like a Statesman. They're right. They are right here. This is not what you would want from a person. Who's the leader you'd want someone who's exemplary you'd want someone who's speaking in a way that would make you proud like that is an American president. Yeah, and the way the speaking part, but that is what we got from Barack Obama what we got from him as the show presidential amazingly. Residential is presidential is anybody's ever been I would argue more so than anybody ever even then Clinton Clinton when he was at his best. I think he was really good. I think Obama was better but well-spoken articulate Pepsi thing. Yes, the measured you know, it made you feel good that a guy smarter than you is the president.


You don't feel like that would Trump you like Jesus Christ. Don't say that. What the fuck are you doing? Get out of here? It's like I'm not like I'm not a supporter of trump what I'm seeing. I'm seeing though is that if you're not if you don't ignore all the things that are going on with Biden somehow or another you're a bad person. Yeah, and that that to me as a person is a comedian is a person who hates fundamentalism as a person who hates rabid ideology. That's driving me crazy because this shit is all right in front of you you watch them stumble through his words constantly left and right. We're ignoring the fact that he's 77 years old. We're ignoring all these signs that show I'm not saying that you should vote for Trump what I'm saying is how the fuck are the Democrats running with this.


How is this in 2020? This is what we're doing. Yeah. This is this what we're doing and even the choice of Tulsa camera like I mean over locking Tulsi gabbard out rather the choice of eliminating her the whole thing sat with me. It's so gross the way they did it the way they pushed her out the way they wouldn't wouldn't even let her speak at the DNC. It's wrong and You know and it was almost like that. She got cancelled by her own party. Yeah. Yeah. It's exactly what it's like and that's that's evil. Right? Like we have a smart veteran to two terms or six terms rather as six years of the congresswoman to to overseas tours to been a congressman for six fucking years exemplary record really reasonable really intelligent displays all of the things you would all the qualities of leadership that you would want from someone running.


President let's talk sir. Yeah, let's do that. Yeah, wait a sec. The whole thing was crazy. The whole thing was crazy and then and then his choice to choose like he literally said I'm going to choose a woman as a running mate. Well, how about choose the best person the best person happens to be a woman? That's great. But if you tell me you're going to specifically eliminate males. What will your thinking in terms of identity politics? Is this the same Joe Biden has been in politics for 50 fucking years all of a sudden you're an ideologue. Who is going with identity politics over the best person for the job? Absolutely clearly clearly. That's this is crazy. Talk Kamala.


The parties diff on the police right? Like that's left Progressive idea. She is literally the police. He's a cop. Yeah and not like if we're going to solidarity a black lives matter and believe that we can positively affect change what she was doing as a cop. She's the worst of the cops. She was targeting in the most racist vicious way trying to attack. Black communities and and black, you know, not even criminals like drug dealers drug users and just hammered them with everything. She possibly could and but now she's our vice president president.


Not only that she withheld evidence that would show that people were innocent. Withheld it from defense attorneys. She kept people incarcerated to use them as cheap labor to fight fire when they were supposed to be released. Do we have to do to get a Tulsi Jocko or a rod you'd like the rock, right? I love the rock. Yeah, he would be like I told sirach or like it'll be calculating they could literally win they could literally went and I would be a hundred percent support of that. It's just we're dealing with this machine man. And this machine wants to stay in control and who is going to be a good player for the machine who's gonna who's gonna do the right thing who's going to do the bidding?


You mean this is how they got Bernie Sanders out. Both times weaseled them out and he still he bends the knee to them every time why I don't know why he's good guy. I don't know doesn't want conflict. I don't know. Yeah, super very reasonable guy when I had a ton of respect for him while I disagree with a lot of his positions in politics. I disagree with a bunch of tolls. He's on foreign policy about how to do that. But that would be a conversation she and I can yes. Well, I would love to have you have that conquers the way you explained it and From your own personal experience serving. This is not just some fucking bullet area fairy ideas. I go everywhere with these things like I Journal kind of like I take little weird notes and you could go and they're all dated from trips to Iraq to Afghanistan to measure to Nigeria to Burkina Faso to Mauritania to Morocco to South after like every freaking crazy place that I have to go and you could look and then like Go forward two years three years and look again.


Be like what look at this change. Like it's right black and white written in front of you. Then my impressions of physically being there at the same place removed by 24 months and that has happened time and time again. Well, that's why I wanted to have you on to talk about this because the narrative that doesn't get discussed because it's either your pro-trump or you proud and Biden and if you're for Trump, you're a racist and if you're for Bryden, you're a fool like this. It's like these narratives are so goddamn stupid and they're so damaging to us. I think a lot of them have been reinforced and stoked the Flames have been stoked by people. In other countries that are at that are acting as trolls. I think that's a lot of what's going on. This is a fucking great video. See if you can find the cap what you got something else.


Yeah, as you guys are talking I found something I didn't wanna interrupt with but little support what we're talking about as our veins were popping this both Joe Nawrocki Russian Chinese and Iranian hackers all targeting 2020 election. Microsoft says, yeah that a Blog today. And a detail what's been going on with these companies surprised anyone know so if they're doing other this, what else are they doing in real time? So they're not just online. You don't think that there are we call them Jed Berg's if you don't think that there are foreign operatives that are working here both at universities and in cities part of the political process or part of the antifa Strategic organization.


They are doing this in real time in person. Not just online. This is craziest with Deserved yeah strong strontium operating for Russia's attack more than 200 organizations including political campaigns. Advocacy groups parties and political Consultants zirconium operating in China has attacked high-profile individuals associated with the election including people associated with the Joe Biden for president campaign and The prominent leaders in the international Affairs Community phosphorus operating from Iran has continued to attack the personal accounts of people. Associated with Donald J Trump for president campaign. Yeah, they're they're fucking with us.


But look yeah, is it one side or the other? No, no over the place Trump Biden the parties Consultants that the point is they have to deliberate delegitimize the process and and the only way that in the best way to do it is just to make it look bad and to make us fight and to make us argue and like the fact that there's people walking down the street being like I hate cops. You guys are evil. Like, do you know any or did you Read, right. What have you just been reading? What has been echoed like my friend Matt, son who called the cops from the fucking the house was making noise. That's that's that's who these people are. Hey, the video is a video of a crow fucking with these two cats.


It's one of my favorite videos. There's a crow and there's these two cats that are looking at each other from opposing rooftops in like we're looking each other and the crow gets over and gets near the cat starts fucking with them the Catholic get out of here watch this. So here's the cat and there's a crow and the crew. Crow flies over and starts fucking with these cats and get these cats to Duke it out. He literally instigates this fight. Look he flies over like a fucking bird is coming near cat. Why would he do that? He's doing it because he wants to fuck with him. So you get some a little agitated and then he flies back and get some a little agitated just fucks with them just a little bit. He's almost and then he flies over to the other cat and he goes back and forth and fucks with look at it goes behind them and fucks with them.


He's irritating them Crow. Fucking smart man, and this little cunt just starts but Pastor in these casks and gets these cat look at him. He's pecking at his ass. He's literally lips in every fight the cat reacts by jumping over and fucking attacking the other cat to go off to the ballroom and the crow follows them. This fucking Crow is a monster that Crow is all the online trolls. These are Biden and Trump supporters engaged in Mortal Kombat here. Look at the crowd. Let it go down the fucking hole with a basement and the crows like that. That's fucking losers fingers friend fight. You're black. You're white fight. Isn't that amazing?


Yeah the videos and that's it right there. I fucking love that video that video is exactly what's going on right now, huh? They were just looking at each other. Yeah, the cats were just looking at each other. They probably would have gone the rest of the day without fighting. Yeah, just that crap in some milk chasing a mouse No, but no I got hunt of a crow started all that fired up and that that crows Russia and China and Iran. It really country that. Tess and then those two nice peaceful cats fell off a roof fighting. Please don't look - what we're doing exact. We're like literally push each other off cliff another one crows, dude, costly. Look at him. Look at him. Just walking up to that cat fuck with them. They like watching fights. Look who's like, yeah get after it guys get after it top Catan how funny is that?


The crows like to do though. Awesome. They do it on purpose those little twats. It's kind of amazing. It is kind of amazing. I mean I kept props to the crow for figuring that out but just for girls are just like people we all like watching fights. Yeah, and and looking at Americans. It's pretty easy to know how to piss us off now. Yes, like every single one of these little hot button topics pop up. There's somebody over there like, oh, I'm going to push that button then a new pop-up button pops up like, oh I'm gonna push that button how many buttons can we have right now because we're getting so pissed off at everything you're all button. We're all button. Yeah, we're fine. There's little buttons. Go outside go exercise go do something go do it. Go have sex. Yeah. Please know if you want to make a change, like don't throw a Molotov cocktail go find a police officer and talk to him for a little bit or go find go to Baltimore and talk to black community there and figure out how you can help you like has anyone gone and figured out what how they can help one of these communities.


No because I don't care. No, that's that's not that doesn't get you Instagram likes the other thing that's going on to that. The timing of the fucking pandemic is so crazily. T' I'm not a conspiracy theorist in the sense. Like I don't I don't believe in nonsense. This is just too much nonsense going on. But God if I was I would be looking at this. I'm like this is this is so perfectly organized and then the response like he people from working keep people from working. So what so they're broken scared and angry and then they're even more subject to the shit. And now as we're what five months removed we're having that same conversation about schools. Well schools has a necessary component for people to work.


Like if your kids aren't in school, you can't go to work because that's a form of child care for a lot of households. Yes, and we're like, I'm not sure it's safe. You I was joking about injecting myself with covid in my neck. Like you could take my breast fed babies that eat elk and free-range chickens and have lived in Safety and Security the entire lives and you could like cover the whole entire room with covid and my ten-month-old is going to poop that stuff out in like an hour because they're healthy balanced powerful individuals my teenage daughters like we have not lived a day in this whole entire pandemic really recognizing What we're supposed to be doing we have maintained Health outside activities exercise hunting real food and like so so better situated and prepare now for what looks like a scary six months in the future.


I'm scared because this entire country six billion people have been locked up moving into an election that is going to be a frightening dangerous. Election. Yeah, so it's there's no winners in this election, but the timer wins whoever wins is going to be chaos. So you think when you say I'm not a conspiracy theorist, but here we are with a pandemic that shut down our economy for five months on an election year that looks like it was the origin is in China. What are your theories? I just think that first of all though I talking to Brett Weinstein about it.


Was a biologist and he went into great. If you listening to this podcast, please go back and listen to most recent podcast. I did with Brett which is like what four months ago Jamie three months ago, maybe something along those lines. Yeah, maybe maybe even two months ago. He detailed the the scientific reasons why he believes this came from a lab and there is a and it's and he said I do not know for certain but but with with reasonable speculation, you could look at this and say this makes a lot of sense that was come from because of these particular reasons. Yeah, that lab was cited in 2018 for safety violations.


This is I mean China because because it's a communist country right because they're a dictatorship. There's not a lot of incentive to behave the way you would hope that an organization would behave like you're under the knife of In the boot of the government all the time that people don't do the best work when they're scared like that and that lab there's no incentive no incentive. Yeah. Yeah you had her how much you work fears your only incentive. Yeah, you don't get anything more for working harder or better right? You just don't get killed. So 2018. They were cited for safety violations.


This is exactly the same area where they're doing. This work on coronavirus has from bats. And this is exactly where the or the origin of the disease was. It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out that it came from there. They don't think that it came on purpose though. They think it was a just a sloppy leak from the lab. Sometimes things happen where they're just perfectly aligned and then people take advantage of those opportunities. They take advantage of these situations. Like there's a lot of people that believe that 9/11 was an inside job. What I think is when they found when 9/11 happened. I think there was many people that took Advantage of the chaos and there was things that were passed like the Patriot Act.


I'm fired up all that sweet reference that Constitution again. Yeah, it's sweeping. But I talked to Snowden recently these sweeping just overall surveillance of law-abiding citizens that are doing nothing wrong and they lied about it. They lied about they all lied about a lot about the Congress a lot about it to our face Obama lied about it. Everybody lied about it. They knew what the fuck they were doing. They took advantage of the fact that people were scared and they started just just going and everybody shit single most intrusive moment in American history in our freedoms not being encroached on not like a little trickle of you know, cut by a thousand or Death By A Thousand Cuts Like 9/11 happened.


We lost and gave up so much of our perceived rights, right? Like no you can't look at my emails. Like I thought my emails were protected like my mail. You can't open my mail without a warrant. There's a due process to that. That's gone. Right like I think every single 20 year old right now expects that every text message that they send in every Facebook message DM Instagram twitch. Every one of those things can be read by somebody else that they don't own that stuff. That's how I grew up. I grew up like that was my ideas. Those are my words those. That's my property. If somebody wants it. They have to have a warrant to look at it now go from 9/11 to Corona.


Aah now the second most serious time that we lost more of our freedoms 9/11 and this Winston Churchill said never waste a good crisis. Yes, and you want to know when a government is going to overreach. It's in crisis. Yes, and if you are not a strong healthy individual that is able to be self-sufficient and be able to rationally look at things without getting spun up by the echo chamber that you're living in and Twitter you're going to allow that to happen because you're just being pitted. Each other by this dribble that's been pushed into your face by people that are just trying to profiteer off of what you see and what you hear and what you think that's exactly what I think is happening right now.


That's exactly what I think is happening. I think there's people that are taking advantage of this crisis. So I think the way to fight that is as a society to unify. To reasonably collectively be like no, you said they can't you know, they canceled Halloween. Yeah, they can't cancel Halloween's working. Gray's know they can't the only way that they can is you allowing it to happen, right? They can't shut down your salon. They can't tell you can't go door-to-door and trick or treat why can't they cannot they can't do that. They can try and the only way that they can't do it is if you go and do it, but the fact is there's no uniformity because they're allowing people to protest so you're allowing people.


Protests some things about some things black lives matter. That's it allowed. Yeah, you can counter covid protest right? You can do that to get covid Los Angeles backtracks on coronavirus Trick or Treat ban this Halloween good you fucks. They should drown you. Hello the fact that you even considered it don't you all and toilets that we did we did it in an hour because California, well, everybody freaked out now, what about 30,000 people moved out of California the day they released online. My wife got a text from one of her friends. She's like Fuck this I'm out of here and she sent her the news on California banning trick or treat. That was her. That was her thing that pedophilia loan would be another reason to leave.


You know, I gotta be out of California pretty is there a lot of pedophilia in California? Yeah. Well, here's another yeah legislation. That's kind of been passed to go there. What is that you put that on your Instagram? Is it is that real? Yeah. It was that a hundred percent legit that's real. So that is that really mean that a 20 year old can have sex with it. And your old tenure because it's a 10-year different so but isn't statutory rape anybody who is under 18? Yeah, so it's lessening the penalty for it. So let's say a and the trans community lgbtq community was in big support of this bill because it's not fair for male to female. So if let's say a 17 year old has sex with a 15 year old and she gets or I'm sorry a 19 year old has sex with a 15 year old and she gets pregnant.


And there is a law in place where the pendant he is not going to go on the sex registry because he is a father to that child would have a difficult time being able to if he's on a sex registry get a job pay for child support. So they have kind of Protections in place where if he only in California. Yeah, but if he had orally or anally had sex with her then The law would be the penalty would be more severe severe he would be on the sex offender the Federalists because he's not trying to procreate so the community like the lgbtq community was like this is an unfair law because you know, if it's a gay relationship they have a harsher penalty then a male and female relationship.


Ship so they should be the same if while I recognize that and I acknowledge that that's the case and I wanted to be fair but I also don't want a 19-year or 24 year old having sex with a 15 year old. Yeah. No, I don't care where it is. And now that's crazy. There's a reason 18 is 18. We there's it's a good number. It's not it should be later told you things you do. Well, I mean to have sex I guess 18 but like I was a disaster. At 18. Well I was too but if I can vote at 18, but if I was 18 in a 23 year old woman wanted to fuck me. I don't think she should go to jail. Now. I was ready. Yeah, I mean 18 year olds are ready.


Like the problem is our perceptions of sex. I mean I'm talking about someone who's a grown adult. Yeah. I feel like 18 is Italy's pretty close to glow on grown adult. Maybe, you know voting we should extend the 21 were drinking is it might not be the worst idea in the world, but as far as like being responsible for your actions 18 is a good number 18. In is where and that was the point of my post is that that person can have consent. Yes, like the the way those Linton written was somebody willfully having an oral sex, right? I'm saying anybody under 18 if you can't But you're not willful you're not allowed to be willful right?


Because you don't have the right to have consent yet, right. You're too young too young. You're not an adult. No. Yeah, that's a fucked up law. And then we only get the crazy sex trafficking of by saw the picture of the guy who made the bill to dress. Well like a fucking dog collar on he's a weirdo I hug. Yo, don't make any laws especially around sex. Yeah. It's but I just don't understand how it passed. It did find how the fuck is that? It has to be signed by Newson. It's passed legislation hasn't been yeah, it's past. Yeah, that's what I was thinking. You just need a wet ink signature Jesus Christ that seems so insane that a 20 year old can fuck her ten-year-old.


Yeah, like a 20 year old can have a ten-year-old boy friend and decide that it's consent a 20 year old man can have a ten-year-old boy friend. And as long as it's within the 10-year boundaries, so like again, I Sighs unconscious bias. I have a pretty jaded view of things and when it comes to like children heavily involved in counter sex trafficking, you know, moving from deliver fund to Guardian group to now with Victor Marx, you know fighting worldwide and nationally like the this disgusting thing that is pedophilia like that is not a sexual orientation and people in power like finding children to victimize and they Are worth money?


Well, this is a thing now where people are trying to portray it as a sexual inclination as a sexual proclivity there. There's a tedx talk about divvy seen that with this woman is talking about how we have to have compassion for pedophilia the same way. We have compassion for homosexuals or trans people. It's like what are you talking about? I mean I have compassion for the person but I'm not going to have compassion for any of their actions and if they need help We can get them help like put them in an institution and they can realign whatever their problems are. But like so be attracted to a child. Yeah is it is period wrong end of story.


I don't care what you think agreed a hundred percent. But here's the thing. How does a woman know like this is the thing about pedophilia like someone who's not a pedophile to say that this person is a pedophile can't help themselves. How do you know like what do you what are you basing this on? Are you basing that? You're not basing on you? Our own personal feelings. Like I know I am attracted to women. That's I know it because it's and I know there's a lot of people like me right and so if I talk to another guy and he goes that girl's hot. Oh, yes. She is hot. I get it. I see what you see. But if you're talking about someone who's attracted to children, that's so fucking alien to me. So if you're telling me that someone can't help themselves because this is a natural sexual inclination.


Like how do you know that? I don't I don't know that that's true. And I don't know what the fuck you do to save them or to fix them. I don't know but I think the primary concern is protecting children primary him more than like like having compassion to or pedophiles, you know protection we have to put action to that word. What does protection look like that is law that is legislation that is people that are being able to stand not not allow evil to happen right for evil to conquer. It just takes Goodman doing nothing standing back and be like, yeah, man, I guess they could recognize and align themselves with being attracted no, no, no. No, no not a chance. The idea is something and you touch a child.


Yeah, let me tell you that's the end. Yeah, not good help. Yeah, and it shouldn't and that's how everybody feels everybody who has children and specifically fuck just the fact that that actually can get all the way through to the governor's office as Bonkers, but who knows what he's gonna do, but if we don't look don't look this finger find out which way the winds blowing how Progressive am I going to be here? You know, Mom I'm all about Getting re-elected and his chances of re-electing now are fucking slim to none. Thank God. They hate him now. Oh my God, he was the darling of California beautiful man. Slicked-back hair looking great speaks. Well my fucking hate him there now my brother system of my sister lives in Paso and her husband who I call my brother because women breast best friends for kids since kids.


He works for a nuclear power plant Chad. And so he's pretty like military go get her. A hard worker, you know, my sister's a homeschooler. She's homeschooled all their kids and they're brilliant like play multiple instruments like, you know grades ahead of everybody else. And while the whole entire world is like what are we gonna do about education? My sister's like individual responsibility. You could have been doing it yourself. Not everybody has that opportunity. I understand my parents would be in the landowners my brother being a police officer like we have been in California for you know, that's where I grew up and we have been fighting for rational. Reasonable politics and not and not and we feel like we're in a foreign land.


Yeah you asked how I came to Texas is like I was a coward. I just couldn't I said I want to be in a fight that I chance of winning. Yeah, like maybe now for the first time California has a has a hope a chance of like changing the course of whether the trajectory damage has been done though. Can you and you can undo it. I looked in crenshaw's man if he said that if A law that's written. We have to unright another law, you know, it's a hard thing to do to take legislation that's already been approved and past and then remove it. That's a harder thing than getting the new law. Right? So now we have like this crazy amount of laws both local state federal and they just keep stacking on top of each other and they're not none of them are good for most of them are I'd loved and Crenshaw there's that's another guy should run for president.


Did we just I just think California. I mean there was an article that was written about me being a coward. I'm leaving like yeah. Yeah, totally you should stay and fight like fuck you. Fuck you and fuck you for a bunch of reasons we could start with you not letting people go back to work. I think that's unconstitutional and insane and I think that's so short-sighted and people are Furious and then when you see Nancy Pelosi go to a fucking hair salon without a mask you like. Oh, I see how you people really are Are you can also never listen to anyone that is telling you to lose a gun when they're protected by private security a hundred percent. You saw that with the mayor of Chicago. She's all for protest until they came to her block and she's like get the protest Off My Block.


I have a right to protect myself. What the fuck are you talking about? That's what everybody's accurate. Yes you hypocrite. It's just in this is what happens when people get into Power. This is my problem. They're protected entire position exact surrounded by people with guns. And they're telling other people us can't go to salons can't you can't get your hair done. You can't go and have a gun but I'm going to sit here in my high tower because I know what's best for you. I just I don't know what the solution is. I thought this glow about yeah vote him out. But even then I think there's a problem with one person running things. I mean, I really think there's a problem with a mayor or a governor. I think there should be a committee. I think there should be a group of people there.


There is right. You have your city council so here in Austin we have Adam mayor and that mayor has a bunch of city council people that's also dumped there are also dumb and do dumb things like defund the police. Yeah, but thankfully we have a hundred million. Yeah, 150 150. Yeah, the governor stepped in and said, okay. Well, if you do that, you don't get any property taxes a genius these brilliant. It is a brilliant move by the governor and if safety becomes so such a concern here, he will roll in State Police to Makeup, yeah the difference. Thanks. Technically. Yes, you're going to learn a little bit about them. They're amazing Department of Public Safety for Texas.


It's our state police force there. They're incredible. They have this super Military Academy. I think people when they hear military like as I was talking about that virtual reality training that we're going to law enforcement like wait, why is this special forces guy training law enforcement like with they don't need us police officer doesn't need to be special forces. Now you don't need a tank or an 84 or you know, 50 cal unless you're fighting the cartels. But what you do need is the process of the refiners fire and being able to train imperfections out of people. Like could you imagine if the city council member had to ride along with the police for a month?


There's a great idea to go on the coals with them domestic disputes pullovers for DUIs. Not sit in the car. They got to get out and walk up to that car. To put their hand on the back of the car put their finger print on there because if they die, they want a little bit of evidence police officers do that every time they walk up to a car. If you watch them. They go in there like put their thumb or their hand on the back of the car. So they're print is on the car. So if they get killed there later, you can find out who did mmm that crazy how sad that is it is but as that police officers walking up there. Hello sir, you know, you're going 85 in a 65. I smell alcohol have to ask you to get out of the car. We're going to sobriety check here on the side of the road, which is dangerous and over here is a city council member that was just recently elected and they're going to be observing this how cool is that there would be a good idea.


If we eliminate a lot of people from that fucking job. Yeah. Yeah, they'd also not did understand like you said, how do we get this information out? Like if you could do anything to you know, like Tulsi gabbard I are going to debate about foreign policy. I first have to explain And let them understand what I've seen and that's a hard thing to do unless somebody sees it and then it changes, you know their view. Yeah fun times man. What do you think happens in November? Do you think first of all do you think that this whole voting by mail thing which is being hotly contested.


It's so I get very nervous when one side is really into it. I want sides really not into I don't like that that makes me real nervous because I don't know what the fuck is going on man. Everything that like if you pull my wallet out, I have a license from ff1 FAA. Like I had to send them a whole bunch of stuff for medial to get into a helicopter. Right? I have my driver's license. I have my concealed carry permit of my security Consulting license. I have by DOD ID. Like that's five different IDs that are like, I can't go do anything in any one of those fields without it. A little picture of my face and and I really like that because like I can't access a government computer without that card.


I can't go in and signed my NC my my annual review my NCR without my card and it's like proof of who I am and what I'm doing and the thought that they're going to mail out tens of thousands if not millions of ballots to dead people, too. They don't even know who they're just sending him to addresses. Did you see what Kate? What's your name? Kaylee? McKenna knee? How do you say her name? The woman is the White House Press Secretary. She see if you can find this. She said that a hundred and Seventeen percent of the people that are registered to vote in California. There's a little just find the quote because it's kind of crazy, but she was talking about here's the prop.


She was arguing for against voter voting online or excuse me voting by mail. She's like, this is why Why like what is happening here whether 17 percent more people than are registered to vote that have the opportunity to vote in California. There are in 2016. I know I butchered that. There's like no proof of voter fraud by mail that I've looked up and found that anybody else has been looking up and find I just saying that it's going to be a problem without providing evidence. What nobody's done it though. Yeah, no one's done that this scale. On it like they're gonna do it what they're saying is they're trying to do all the voting by mail or a giant percentage of it by mail that's never happened before the same with the post office problem.


They're like, no we're not going to negatively affect the lecture. We're going to try to do everything that we can but like the post office. Like, I don't know if we can do this right now. Yeah when someone saying there's no evidence for voter fraud in the past. Yeah, right, but what percentage of people voted by mail in the past has been reasonably small find out that again Annie. Quote because it's a kind of crazy thing a hundred and Seventeen percent California registered. She she was explaining how there's there's multiple issues with this like these people that are sending these mail-in ballots. Like how many of these people how many of these are legit? How do you find out how much how much research has to be done and how much investigation has to be done to make sure that these are legit balance.


You see some of the districts in Illinois during the 2006 election 2016 election there was Hundred and four percent came in for yeah Obama. Yeah, like that's not right since this. Yeah hospital. It doesn't make sense. It's like I'm a hundred percent committed. Okay good. I'm a hundred ten percent committed that business in pain can't be too who stop there. You can't be a hundred and ten P. I know you want a bigger number, but that's an American thing to want. But what I'm look trying to look this up for her all I'm finding are reports saying that she's voted by Baal a lot of times. Yeah, but that's not we're asking I know what I'm looking for. The article are so hard to find right find the specific if you ever started to type in like a Twitter search write a hundred and Seventeen percent vote by mail when you type in like on Twitter, for example, like if you put Trump in a hashtag the things that populate underneath that oh my God, this is see.


Yeah. It seems like Fortran wide Trump's evil something white supremacist, but those are the ones that automatically Late, yeah, or they project Veritas did a funny thing. They were showing where they knew things were trending throughout the world and here in the United States at a crazy hundreds of thousands of retweets through this hashtag, but none of it we're going to automatically populate in a search under that same thing. It was there's a real problem with that for sure the bias on social media is Unstoppable such as social media. Yes information searches when your Try and like my advice. I love my daughter Julia and she was preparing.


I think she was 16 or 15 She Was preparing for like a debate and she was getting information and she's just like Googling the stuff and I was like, so when you know in college, I wasn't we weren't allowed to do that and citing our sources. Like they had to be like very specific and how that process works. And you know, when you do real research chick, will Google is just giving me the information. I was like no no Google's just giving you the information that Google wants Have check but I'm just Google like she could not compute that the information that she was being given from a search that it wasn't just a search, right? And how do you rated? Yeah, how do you explain to somebody that the information that they're reading isn't all of the real information. It's only a portion has to take it takes a long time before you really digest that YouTube's another weird one.


We're like kind of Hot Topic issues from an opposing idea those get buried. Well, how about all these doctors? Is that were against this idea of the the pandemic and the lockdown there were saying we need we need herd immunity me like real doctors and I don't agree with them. I'm not saying that they're right, but I'm saying that like they were all banned like some doctors are saying we use hydroxychloroquine and Z packs. And I've had amazing success treating patients Band video band and the dangerous information my own doctor. My own doctor said hydroxychloroquine is fantastic if you catch it early. Yeah, he goes.


It really stops the propagation of the disease if you catch it early, but the will have a doctor I saw step but it becomes it becomes political Brendan Schaub when he got covid, you know, the doctor said to him. He said I don't know what your political leanings are, but I really believe in hydroxychloroquine. He's like, what the fuck are you saying? My political leaning? How does it have anything to do with my house? Accus? Give me the shit. That works. I don't want to get sick. He's like I got covid and so he got on the hydroxychloroquine. He was good in three days like you have to the red. On the blue pill. Yeah, and they're both crazy pills. Can I just have what's in the middle, you know because it that rational reasonable. Yeah. Give me a purple bill. Yeah, it's a weird fucking time for everything.


You don't have to find that Jamie if you give up. I mean, I'm sorry. I found that actually an article from two years ago explaining what how that number was recent out there. And I know this video he's talking about it. I found it in the transcripts, but I'm trying to say that like how they found out that there's a hundred and twelve percent of the people. I registered to vote there's an explanation for it. Okay, people move and they don't fixed it like Reggie, right? Okay their address. So her description of it is she's making it seem like it's fraud and it's not fraudsters people that have low but like it doesn't make sense. Does it know that doesn't make sense and right moves on so it's not that's fraud. So she's playing a little game. Yeah. That's what she's does. Yeah, it's pretty good.


There's a whole thing going on today that Trump was being interviewed by Bob Woodward for his book. Yes. I'm back in February. He's down. Playing their down playing as the word. It's going all over the Internet. He's downplaying the yeah the vital thing. Yeah. She then said he's not downplaying it when he's on tape saying I'm downplaying and now he's coming out saying those words I used on tape or not the words I said, it's like, huh? What didn't she she said there was a also thing when she was confronted by a press person about that and she said read the rest of his quote the rest of his quote wasn't just the yes. I'm But because I don't want people to be in a panic about this, but I am concerned like there was a there was an additional quote hard to quote.


I wasn't have to read it. I heard that the vid IQ could hear it. But let's play it you got it's not ours to play. Oh, it's Bob Woodward's guess. Yeah, like whoever's putting out CNN Bob Woodward. What is it isn't the Trump's it's Trump's words. It's not marked tape to put this is where we could get into like. Okay, I get it. I get a little book right now right on the book pothead bird and just saying like it's all house. Like I said, It's all confusing Watergate guy. Yeah must be taking his vitamins. How long's Ellen's you got love Daddy how old's that? Dude must be old as fuck, right? Yes, probably in his 40s back in back then. Yeah seven. There you go. He's so he's biding know that's the same age crazy.


It is a different time. Now people are living longer, you know, like I know some seventy seven year olds that you're like you look Shane. Be his dad is like as a six-pack. He's pushing 70 really like jacked. He's out there barefooting on the lake at like 40 miles an hour. He's every single morning and wow all his of his professional bull rider friends, you know, like yeah, they got gnarled hands from strapping into the bowls for so long, but they're still like chunky shoulders strain next. You're like dude this how old are you look amazing, you know, like I'm I'm 41. I'm liking these guys. You know, I'm gonna look like this when I get this age.


Yeah, you can do that now in the old days Mike Tyson. Yeah, dude. Listen, man. I had him on the podcast, uh, like ten months ago. And then I had them on the podcast last week and desk two totally different human beings. Yeah. That's a science project right there. Really? There's a lot going on, but you can do that now. Oh, yeah, you can do that now and tell dude. He looks fucking terrifying. Well, I mean still like ready to go. How old are you 53? Okay, so I'm 41:53. You know anybody that looked Hewitt when you grew up that was 53 now, they're all dead. Right then. They weren't Jack. Yeah, so like I remember 40 my dad's 40th birthday and all his 40 year old friends were there and not to talk disparagingly about my dad's friends, but you know, there were beer bellies, you know, and guys kind of hanging out talking War Stories of you know, their Glory Days and College athletics.


Now, you look like my friends that are all 40s and you're like, Pretty fit Jack. Yeah, Jack muscular healthy fast, you know like the kids want to go play ball and they're like, yeah try to keep up boy will people know the benefit of exercise for overall health when you get older now, they didn't nobody fucking worked out in the 50s and 60s. They barely work the worked out of there doing a sport. Once they were doing the sport. They didn't do shit. I'm Gonna Be Free till I die. Yeah, where do the grave you're like fuck? Yeah. What is wrong with this guy's energy. Why is it raining so much exactly. I'm still gonna Sheepdog response like this 70 year old just out shot me exactly. Yeah, when people talk to me about like, you know, what supplements you take.


I'm like all of them. Whatever works. What's working tell me what works I'll get people on tell me what's work. I'll take that. Yeah, what works what works now, I'm just trying to stay Jack. I want to keep moving. Yeah. Well High libido, I want high energy. I want a ton of fun and I want people to like, how do I keep up rage rage against the dying of the light? I'm not going softly. Fuck. Yeah. What time do The Fray will go? Yeah. I don't I don't think you people know what it's like to be both either people know what it's like to be tired and weak. I don't know what it's like to be strong, you know, but when you've been both when you realize when you really know where it can slide into and the only way you know, that is if you've been strong and most people never really get there, but when you get strong in the maybe you get a little bit sick or maybe get injured and you go fuck once it's ACL Heroes up.


I'm getting back after it. I feel so good. Yes. The I hate that I wasn't joking about the transformation Jamie anneka one of these courses. Jamie's gonna be shooting people times. He's gonna be busy. Can you believe you have a gun? Yeah. I got one right there. Well, I don't know about the shooting people. He's ready. Yeah, he's ready. But like you get this this contagious hitch, you know and like you scratch the surface and then you see what's on the other side like oh and you scratch a little bit more and you see like how How fun and like food taste better sex is more fun. You like work is easier everything just gets better.


And then he like you then then you're in like now you're hooked. Yeah, and then but that process is like, you know a calloused hand, you know chunky ears. Yep, but man it's worth it's all worth it. So fucking preach it preach it preach it from the rooftops, but hate keep that heat out get the heat. Yeah, that does not help doesn't help. Doesn't help you either solution-oriented. It's the only poison that kills the vessel that's containing it. I love that. Yeah, it's it's fucking terrible for you. And it roads everything physically mentally and I posted a picture on Instagram and it was it was off of Andy. No, he just took all the mugshots of everybody that had been arrested.


They'll look like shit. It's so bad. I think bad skin sunken eyes weird hair lines like multiple colors. Hours, you know like bad tattoo every bad thing that you could see visually about a person was in a lot of people are like they it looks like they have some mental health issues and I don't know how you see mental health issues and in people but there is like you don't let yourself look like that unless there's a problem. You see the video of the woman who is saying I don't give a fuck that a fascist died tonight dear see that video from Portland after the guy got shot and killed. No, no spilling a pair big fat sloppy lady. With fucking sweatpants on and I'm like, of course you don't care.


You don't even care about your own body. Don't care about yourself. You don't care about your life. You found a microphone. You got a microphone now and you're yelling it out because you've got a whole bunch of other losers who gathered together and you could say nonsense and they all cheer but I want all of those people on this side. Yeah, like II feel sorry for her I pity her. I want to go take her by the hand. I want to walk a couple of blocks with her. I want to pick a couple of meals for her and I want to get up the next day and walk for blocks with her and then pick a few more meals. Her and then like everything starts getting better. The problem is she'd have to let go and realize that she's wrong. She's like over hate. We like over hate let go of what she's done. Like let go the path. Let go of what you've done with your body what you've done with your brain let go of the path that you've been on and recognize you're a human being and you can change learn and grow but you got to recognize this is cheering for someone who got murdered in the street.


You should be like, this is not what we're about. This is all wrong saying I don't give a fuck of a fascist die tonight like know that that Guy who you think is a fascist as a human being he might have a child. He might have a wife. He might he definitely has a mom and a dad like this is not right. This is not how we're supposed to be. We're supposed to be a community America's supposed to be a community and if we disagree or we agree, we're supposed to work it out when I'm supposed to be shooting at each other in the streets over fucking nonsense and you're not supposed to be cheering about it with a bunch of other losers. That's not what this is supposed to be about and no and no one is doing a goddamn thing about it in Portland. They're just letting it go that fucking name. There is an idiot. Yes. He knows Christ is he bad?


I loved Portland. It's amazed have years ago. I've loved visiting there. I was there before the pandemic really? I did the Moda Center there we do. Great go. I love great food. Fuck. Yeah. They had great everything. They've got food truck. The people are cool. We run a course. There are a few times a year and we always loved like guys the instructors always like I want to do the Portland one because like the b&bs are cool. You got all the water. Everything is gorgeous all the food. Fantastic and like organ really the whole Northwest Washington Northern California and Oregon like they're cool people, you know, they're like, they're kind of kind of hippie but also kind of like about health and about freedom, but they're also made a little Progressive and some of their social ideas, but they want to be left alone so that it's the cool people.


Yeah. It's a ton of fun. But now we're like can we run a course in Portland? Can we see a small amount of people man? So small percentage of the millions of people that live up there? Yeah. It's a small loud angry fucked up group of people with a majority needs to step up and they're kind of trying they're trying, you know, there's a lot of people that are very upset about what's going on and trying to figure out some way to get the mayor to act or get the state police to act or get someone to act as more than a hundred days protest. I love the lawsuits that are starting to pop up by business owners. Yeah. Was that the district in Seattle or they're like, oh yeah Chad.


Oh, yeah, just a bunch of people are suing the city and the state for not providing the services that they had by taxes and legislation. They're supposed to have so their businesses were burnt all because they're saying that the local government was complicit in letting these things happen by not protecting by not having police come and see. No, you can't do this. There's a law that prohibits you from this because a guy has a cell phone and you don't know who that guy is. You don't get to go beat him. Right? Like I don't have control of this business. So I'm going to go smash the windows and burn it down. All those things are happening where it within that Chaz like, well, there's laws against that right that's arson and that's the salt and but you guys weren't enforcing any of these.


So the lawsuit is that these people are complicit and it's like it's going to be one of them was a father of a murdered kid is I mean the think the city the city of Seattle for allowing that to happen. Well have you stuff? I'm sorry. Yeah, there's rule of law for a reason security stability. There is it's like, you know, this is a funny thing that Trump does or tweets Law and Order all the time. You look every few days Law and Order all caps, but he's right you need that. That's how you have safety. That's how you have. Peace. What's that of the movie where you get like a night to go crazy and like a Purge yeah that tell me that didn't inspire a lot of these fucks did for sure.


Yeah, and I mean you actually see like tactics that were used in that movie being used in sometimes Hollywood is is more real Than Fiction and like that's what happened. They took what they were watching like, oh we can go and do this. No, you can't and don't try it in Texas. No, that's that's a terrible idea bad idea. Especially what you're saying about all the special ops guys that are here so many enjoy the cigars they had another to us. Yeah, everybody loves you. It's funny. Thanks, man. I love them too. This dude. We're already more than three hours in here.


Holy crap believe that how do you have how fast it time fly? No. I said look at that school and be like that was pretty yeah, the white-tailed deer and shot in Idaho or Iowa rather my friend John Dudley's property. Delicious that guy ever comes around. Can I just watch yes shoot a bow. I'll have him talk to you. I was have him teach you Karen Hayes be happy to yeah, both those guys over here camel be here next week. You wanna hang out with him. I'm we're shooting you're invited. We're shooting Thursday, Friday Saturday Sunday. So well when Dudley's here and will be here. I will I will set it up. Have you shot a bow before?


Yeah, I know. Okay you both. That's right. Okay, cool. Yeah, I'll have them help you give you some pointers and shetty's he'll fucking dumbass groups out like that. Yeah, he's awesome. I so appreciate you brother. Thank you very much for being here. Yeah, I'm glad you're here. I couldn't be happier. Just got to start saying yes to some of those invites. Okay, I will tell us whether dropping I will copters. Well flying. I was just It sounds I would we what we had to put this fucking place together. I move in there was a lot going on. We I mean, I'm literally decided to move and was moved in a month. That's insane. Yeah, so cool. Yeah bought a house in less than a month. I was like, let's do it. Let's go since wife and kids were in I was like, let's fucking go.


Yeah and it all coincided with the podcast moving the Spotify which was crazy. They thought it was crazy. Like what are you doing? And I'm like, let's fucking party. Yes have some fun, man. Let's make it. Tried to Texas. All right. Thank you. Tim. I pledged a brother and God bless. Goodbye everybody. Thank you friends for tuning into the show. And thank you too, man. Skate keeping my balls trimmed and Polished get 20% off and free shipping by going to manscaped.com Rogan trust me is the best ball trimmer the world has ever known not both. You know, what trim your balls just a hair. That's that's the point. It's not going to cut your balls. You'll just cut your ball here and it does it better than anything the world's.


No, 20% off with free shipping at manscaped.com Rogan. Trust me your balls will thank you. Thank you also to rev Town jeans the best fucking jeans I've ever worn. They're the shit. If you see me wearing jeans, I'm wearing rev Town jeans and you can pick up a pair at rev Town.com / Rogan upgrade your denim game today. That's rev Town.com / Rogan. We're also Brought to you by butcher box fantastic high-quality humanely raised meat that you can trust they deliver 100% grass-fed grass-finished beef free range organic chicken Heritage breed pork and wild caught Seafood directly to your door.


When you become a member, you're joining a community that's focused on doing what's better for all and that means caring about the lives of the animals the livelihoods of the farmers and treating our planet with respect and joining better meals together and Ground beef is back for life for limited time. New members can get two pounds of free ground beef in every butcher box order by signing up today at butcher box.com Rogan. That's butcher box.com Rogan to get ground beef for life. And we brought to you by square space to host of my website Joe Rogan.com and an awesome place for you to make a website. It is easy with Squarespace. They've got it nailed and then let you try it for free.


Go to squarespace.com Joe for a free trial then when you are ready to launch use the offer code Joe and save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. Thank you friends much. Love to everyone bye-bye.